All praise be to Allah alone , the Sustainer of all the worlds .
Most Compassionate , Ever - Merciful .
Master of the Day of Judgment .
( O Allah ! ) You alone do we worship and to You alone we look for help .
Show us the straight path .
The path of those upon whom You have bestowed Your favours .
Not of those who have been afflicted with wrath and nor of those who have gone astray .
Alif , Lam , Mim . ( Only Allah and the Messenger know the real meaning . )
( This is ) the Glorious Book in which there is no chance of doubt . ( It is ) a guide for those who guard against evil and fear Allah .
Those who believe in the unseen , and establish prayer ( fulfilling all requisites ) and spend ( in Our way ) out of what We have given them .
And those who believe in ( all ) that which has been revealed to you and that which was revealed before you , and also have ( perfect ) faith in the life after death .
It is they who follow Guidance from their Lord and it is they who shall achieve real success .
Verily those who have adopted disbelief , it is the same for them whether you warn them or you warn them not , they will not believe .
Allah ( as a result of their own choice ) has set a seal on their hearts and their ears and there is a blindfold ( set ) over their eyes . And for them there is severe torment .
And amongst people there are ( also ) some who say : We believe in Allah and the Day of Judgment , whereas they are not ( at all ) believers .
They seek to deceive Allah ( i . e . the Messenger ) and the believers but ( in fact ) they deceive only themselves and they are not aware of it .
In their hearts is a disease . So Allah has worsened their disease . For them , there is painful punishment because they used to tell lies .
When it is said to them : Do not spread disorder in the land , they say : It is we who reform .
Beware ! ( Truly ) it is they who spread disorder , but they do not have any sense ( of it ) at all .
And when it is said to them : Believe as ( other ) people have believed , they say : Shall we also believe ( as those ) fools have believed ? Beware ! ( Certainly ) they are themselves fools but they do not know ( their foolishness and low level ) .
And when they ( the hypocrites ) meet the believers , they say : We ( too ) have believed , and when they meet their devils in privacy they assure them : We are certainly with you . We only mock ( the believers ) .
Allah punishes them for their mockery and lets them loose ( so that they meet their fate ) . So they are wandering blindly in their transgression .
These are the people who have purchased misguidance for guidance ; but their trade did not yield any gain and they did not know the way to ( gainful and profitable ) bargain .
Their example is like a person who lit a fire ( in surrounding darkness ) and when it brightened the environment , Allah took away their light and left them in total darkness . Now they cannot see anything .
They are deaf , dumb and blind . So they will not return ( to the right path ) .
Or their example is like a rain pouring from the sky wherein there are layers of darkness , thunder and lightning ( as well ) . They thrust their fingers into their ears fearing death owing to thunder . And Allah has encompassed the disbelievers .
It seems as if the lightning would snatch away their sight .
When their ( surroundings ) are lit with a flash , they start walking
and when darkness covers them , they stand still .
And if Allah willed , He could deprive them absolutely of hearing and sight .
Surely Allah is All - Powerful to do everything .
O People ! Worship your Lord Who created you and ( also ) those who were before you , so that you become God - wary .
( He is the One ) Who spread out the earth for you as a floor , and erected the sky as a mansion , and showered water from the sky and brought forth with that ( a variety of ) fruits for your nourishment .
So , do not set up equals with Allah while you know ( the truth of the matter ) .
And if you are in doubt about this ( Book ) which We have revealed to Our ( exalted ) servant , then produce only one chapter like this . And ( for this task ) you may call upon ( all ) your helpers apart from Allah , if you are true ( in your doubt and denial ) .
But if you fail to do it and you shall never be able to do it then guard yourselves against the Fire whose fuel is human beings ( the disbelievers ) and stones ( their idols ) which is prepared for disbelievers .
And , ( O Beloved , ) give glad tidings to those who believe and keep doing pious deeds that for them there are gardens ( of Paradise ) beneath which streams flow .
When some fruit will be given to them from these gardens to eat they will say ( looking at its appearance ) :
This is the same fruit that was provided to us ( in the world ) before ,
whereas they shall be given fruits resembling ( only in appearance ) .
In Paradise there will ( also ) be chaste spouses for them and they shall abide there forever .
Indeed Allah is not reluctant to narrate some example ( for better comprehension ) , whether of a mosquito or something even more ( disgusting ) than that .
The believers know well that this example is a ( pointer to the Truth ) from their Lord .
But those who have adopted disbelief ask ( on hearing ) : What could Allah mean by this example ?
( In this way ) Allah holds many astray and guides many aright with the same example .
And by this He leaves in error only those who are ( already ) disobedient .
( These disobedient people are those ) who break the promise of Allah after having confirmed it , and break that ( relationship ) which Allah has ordered to join , and create disorder in the land . It is they who are the losers .
How can you deny Allah whereas you were lifeless and He gave you life , then He will cause you to die and will again bring you back to life , and then to Him will you be returned ?
He is the One Who created for you all that is in the earth . Then He turned towards higher regions ( of the universe ) and perfected them into seven heavenly firmaments . And He has full knowledge of everything .
And ( call to mind ) when your Lord said to the angels : I am about to place My deputy on the earth . They submitted : Will You put as Your ( vicegerent ) on the earth such as will do mischief in it and shed blood , while we are engaged in glorifying You with celebrating Your Praise and extolling Your Holiness ( all the time ) ? ( Allah ) said : I know that which you do not know .
And Allah taught Adam the names of all ( things ) , and then set them before the angels and said : Tell Me the names of these things if you are true ( in your assumption ) .
The angels ( humbly ) submitted : Glory to You , You are Holy ( Free from every deficiency ) . We have no knowledge except that which You have taught us . Surely , You alone are All - Knowing , All - Wise .
Allah said : O Adam , ( now ) apprise them of the names of these things . So when Adam had told them the names of those things , ( Allah ) said : Did I not tell you I know ( all ) the hidden realities of the heavens and the earth and also know all that you disclose and all that you conceal ?
And ( also recall the time ) when We commanded the angels : Prostrate yourselves before Adam . Then they all prostrated themselves to Adam except Iblis ( Satan ) . He refused and showed arrogance and ( consequently ) became one of the disbelievers .
And We ordained : Adam , reside you and your wife in this Paradise and eat of it , both of you , whatever you like and from wherever you will . But do not go near this tree lest you ( join ) the transgressors .
Then Satan shook them from that place and removed them from the ( blissful ) location where they were . And ( eventually ) We ordained : Go down ( and live in the earth ) ; you will remain enemies to each other , and now in the earth has been destined a dwelling place and sustenance for you for a fixed time .
Then Adam learnt some words ( of humility and repentance ) from his Lord . So Allah accepted his repentance . Surely He is the One Who is Most Relenting , Ever - Merciful .
We said : Leave it ( the Paradise and settle in the earth ) all of you . Then if there comes to you Guidance from Me , whoever will follow My Guidance , neither shall any fear ( obsess ) them nor shall they grieve .
And those who disbelieve and deny Our Revelations , it is they who shall be the inmates of Fire . They shall abide in it forever .
O Children of Yaqub ( Jacob ) ! Recall My favours which I bestowed upon you and fulfil the promise ( made ) to Me , I shall fulfil the promise ( made ) to you . And always fear Me alone .
And believe in ( the Book ) that I have revealed ( to My Messenger Muhammad , [ blessing and peace be upon him ] ) while it confirms ( originally ) that which you possess . And do not be the first to deny it nor barter My Revelations for a small ( worldly ) price . And fear Me alone .
And do not mix up the truth with falsehood nor conceal the truth deliberately .
And establish Prayer and pay Zakat ( the Alms - due ) regularly and kneel down ( together ) with those who kneel down .
Do you command others for piety and forget yourselves , while you ( also ) recite the Book ( of Allah ) ? So , do you not think ?
And seek ( Allahs ) help through patience and Prayer . But this is no doubt hard except for the humble ( whose hearts have been softened with the Love of Allah and gripped with His Fear ) .
( It is they ) who are certain that they are about to meet their Lord and to Him are they going to return .
O Children of Yaqub ( Jacob ) ! Recall those favours that I bestowed upon you and that I exalted you above all the people ( of your age ) .
And fear that Day when no soul shall be able to pay any compensation on behalf of another .
Nor shall any intercession be accepted from him ( of a person who shall not have Allahs permission to intercede ) .
Nor shall any compensation be accepted from him ( for his own salvation ) .
And they will not be helped ( against Allahs decree ) .
And ( also call to your mind the time ) when We delivered you from Pharaohs people , who used to inflict severe torment upon you : they slaughtered your sons and kept your daughters alive . There was an arduously terrible trial in it from your Lord .
And when We parted the river ( to rescue you ) and ( in this way ) delivered you and ( on the contrary ) We drowned Pharaohs people before your eyes .
And ( also recall the time ) when We made an appointment with Musa ( Moses ) for forty nights . Then after Musa ( Moses went into retreat ) you took the calf as ( your ) god for worship and you were no doubt aweful transgressors .
Then We pardoned you ( even ) after that so that you might give thanks .
And when We bestowed upon Musa ( Moses ) the Book and the miracle distinguishing the truth from falsehood so that you might take the path of guidance .
And when Musa ( Moses ) said to his people : O my people , no doubt you have ( seriously ) wronged your own souls in taking the calf ( as your god ) . Now turn in repentance to your Creator ( the True Sustainer ) .
So , kill one another ( among yourselves so that those who have not taken the calf for worship and stuck to their religion should kill those who worshipped the calf as punishment for turning away from their religion .
This ( act ) would be the best ( repentance ) for you in the sight of your Creator .
Then He accepted your repentance .
Surely , He is Most Relenting , Ever - Merciful .
And when you said : O Musa ( Moses ) ! We will never believe in you until we see Allah completely unveiled ( before our eyes ) . So , ( on this ) a thunder seized ( and eliminated ) you , and you kept watching ( this spectacle yourselves ) .
Then We brought you back to life after your death so that you pay ( Us ) thanks .
And ( recall ) when We cast the shade of clouds over you ( in the Tiha valley ) and sent down for you manna and quails so that you might eat of the pure things We provided for you . So they did not harm Us at all ( by disobeying and showing Us disregard ) but harmed persistently their own souls .
And ( remember ) when We said : Enter this city and eat as much as you wish from wherever you desire but enter ( the city ) gate prostrating and praying : ( O our Lord ! ) We seek forgiveness ( for all of our sins ) . We shall ( then ) forgive your ( previous ) sins and , ( besides , ) We shall bestow more ( favours and blessings ) upon the righteous .
But ( those ) transgressors substituted some other phrase in place of that which was said to them . So We sent down a calamity from heaven on ( those ) evildoers ( in the form of plague ) because they were disobeying ( persistently ) .
And ( recall also the time ) when Musa ( Moses ) prayed for water for his people . We directed : Strike that rock with your stick . Then twelve springs gushed out of that ( rock ) . Verily each clan identified their respective drinking place . ( We said : ) Eat and drink of the sustenance ( given ) by Allah but do not seek doing mischief in the land .
And when you said : O Musa ( Moses ) , we cannot be content with only one kind of food ( i . e . manna and quails ) , so pray to your Lord ( in our favour ) that He may bring forth for us of cultivated produce : green herbs , cucumbers , wheat , garlic , lentils and onions .
( Musa [ Moses ] ) said ( to his people ) : Do you demand something inferior in exchange for something superior ? ( And if that is what you wish then ) go down to any city . Surely ( there ) will be ( available ) all what you demand .
Then dishonour and deprivation were brought upon them and they incurred the wrath of Allah because they used to deny the Signs of Allah and kill the Prophets unjustly .
This was also because they used to disobey and would ( always ) exceed limits .
Verily , those who have believed , and ( those who were ) Jews and Christians and Sabians , those ( of them ) who believe in Allah and the Last Day and act piously , there is for them their reward with their Lord . Neither shall any fear obsess them , nor shall they grieve .
And ( recall ) when We took a firm promise from you and raised the Mount of Sinai high above you , so that you hold fast firmly what We have given you . And bear in mind whatever is ( written ) in this ( Book , the Torah , ) so that you become pious .
Yet you turned back after this ( promise and warning ) . So , had there not been Allahs Bounty and His Mercy upon you , you would have been wrecked indeed .
And , ( O Jews , ) certainly you know well those of you who violated ( the injunctions concerning ) the Sabbath ( Saturday ) . So We said to them : Be you apes , rejected and despised .
So We made this ( event ) a lesson of warning for their contemporaries as well as for later generations , and ( a source of ) admonition for the pious .
And ( also recollect the event ) when Musa ( Moses ) said to his people : Verily , Allah enjoins you to sacrifice a cow . They said : Do you make a fool of us ? Musa ( Moses ) said : I seek the protection of Allah ( against ) becoming one of the ignorant .
( Then ) they said : Pray for us to your Lord that He may make clear to us what kind of cow ( that ) shall be ? ( Musa [ Moses ] ) said : Certainly He ordains that the cow is to be neither old nor young ( heifer ) , but in between ( fully grown ) . So now implement what you have been ordered .
They ( again ) said : Pray to your Lord for us that He may specify what her colour should be . Musa ( Moses ) said : He says , the cow should be yellow , rich in tone , ( so attractive that ) it pleases the viewers .
( This time ) they said : Pray for us to your Lord that He may make clear to us what exact type of cow it is ( because ) the cow has become doubtful to us , and if Allah so wills , we shall indeed be guided aright .
( Musa [ Moses ] said , ) Allah has ordained : ( That is not any inferior cow . Instead ) it is certainly ( a superior ) cow , which has been employed neither for ploughing nor for watering the field , a cow in sound health , without any blemish . They said : Now you ( have ) brought the truth . So they sacrificed it though they did not look like doing it .
And when you killed a man then started disputing among yourselves ( for its blame ) , and Allah was to unveil that event which you were concealing .
Then We commanded : Strike this ( dead body ) with a piece of this ( cow ) . That is how Allah restores the dead to life ( or will give life to the dead on the Day of Resurrection , ) and shows you His Signs so that you may apply your knowledge and understanding .
Then ( even ) after this your hearts hardened . So ( in hardness ) they ( have become ) like stones or even harder .
For of stones there are some from which streams burst out ; and , certainly , some out of them are such ( stones ) that split up and water gushes out of them ;
nd indeed there are others of them that fall due to fear of Allah .
( Alas ! Your hearts have not remained even that much soft , tender and feeble ) and Allah is not unaware of what you do .
( O Muslims ! ) Do you expect that they ( the Jews ) will believe in you whereas amongst them were people of a group who heard the Word of Allah ( Taurat [ the Torah ] ) then altered it ( themselves ) after understanding it , although they knew well ( what the Truth was and what they were doing ) ?
And ( they have reached such state ) when they meet the believers they say : We ( too ) have believed ( in Muhammad , blessing and peace be upon him , like you ) ,
and when they are together in isolation , they say : Do you tell them ( the Muslims ) that which Allah has unfolded to you ( through the Torah in connection with the Prophethood and glory of the last of the Prophets , Muhammad , blessings and peace be upon him ) so that they may use it in argument against you in the Holy Presence of your Lord ? Do you not have ( even this much ) sense ?
Are they not aware that Allah knows full well all that they hide and all that they show ?
And among them ( the Jews , some ) are illiterate ( as well ) who do not know ( even the bare minimum about the meaning and connotations of ) the Book ( except hearsay and false hopes ) . They know only to recite ( the Book ) verbally and follow mere speculation and assumption .
So , a serious disaster awaits those who write the Book with their own hands , then say : This is from Allah , just to earn a paltry price against that . So they will face destruction ( owing to the Book ) that their hands have written and ( for the compensation ) that they are earning .
And they ( the Jews also ) say : The Fire ( of Hell ) shall not touch us except for a small number of days . ( Just ) ask ( them ) : Have you obtained ( such ) a promise from Allah ? Then He will never violate His promise . Or do you make inadvertently ( such an ) allegation against Allah which you do not know yourselves .
Of course he who adopts evil and is encompassed by his sins , it is they who are the inmates of Hell . They are its permanent residents .
And those who have believed and have done pious deeds , it is they who are the inhabitants of Paradise . They shall live there forever .
And ( remember ) when We took a firm promise from the Children of Yaqub ( Jacob ) : Do not worship ( anyone ) besides Allah , and be nice to the parents and ( do good to ) the kindred and orphans and the needy .
And ( also ) talk of piety to the common people ( in a polite and nice manner ) . And establish Prayer and pay on Zakat ( the Alms - due ) .
Then , except a few , all the rest of you turned back ( from the promise , ) and you are but averse ( to the Truth ) .
And when We took from you ( this ) solemn covenant ( as well ) : You shall not shed one anothers blood ( among yourselves ) nor shall you expel your people ( from their homes and townships ) . Then you agreed ( to implement it ) and you ( also ) bear witness ( to it ) .
Yet it is you who are killing your own people and banishing a section of your own folk from their homeland , and ( furthermore ) helping ( their enemies ) with sin and transgression against them .
And if they come to you as captives , you ransom their release ( so that they remain obliged to you ) whereas it had been forbidden to you to exile them from their homeland .
Do you believe in some parts of the Book and deny some others ? So he who does so from amongst you , what can be his punishment but disgrace ( and humiliation ) in the worldly life
and ( also ) on the Day of Resurrection ( such people ) will be returned to the most ruthless torment . And Allah is not unaware of your deeds .
It is they who have purchased the worldly life for the Hereafter . So neither will their torment be lessened nor will they be helped .
And surely We gave Musa ( Moses ) the Book ( the Torah ) and sent ( many ) Messengers after him in succession .
And We gave Isa , son of Maryam , ( Jesus , son of Mary , ) as well luminous Signs and strengthened ( and supported ) him by means of the Holy Spirit .
But ( what followed is that ) whenever a Messenger brought to you ( the Commandments ) whom your ( ill - commanding ) selves disliked , you adamantly resisted there and then . You belied some of them and started killing others .
And the Jews said : Our hearts are wrapped up in covers . ( Nay , ) but Allah has cursed them for their revolt against faith . So , little do they believe .
And when the Book ( the Quran ) came to them from Allah which ( originally ) validates that Book ( the Torah ) which was with them , whereas , before this , they themselves used to pray for victory over the disbelievers ( through the intermediation of the Last Prophet , Muhammad , [ blessing and peace be upon him , ] and the Holy Quran revealed to him ) ,
but when came to them the same Prophet ( Muhammad , blessing and peace be upon him , along with the Book revealed to him , the Quran ) whom they had ( already ) recognized , they denied him . So Allahs curse is upon such ( deliberate ) disbelievers .
How evil a bargain they made in exchange for their lives : that they deny the Book revealed by Allah merely begrudging that Allah bestows ( His revelation ) out of His Bounty upon any of His servants He wills . So they earned manifold wrath of Allah and there is a humiliating torment for the disbelievers .
And when it is said to them : Believe in this ( Book ) which Allah has ( now ) revealed , they say : We believe only in that ( Book ) which was revealed to us , and they deny all other than that , whereas this ( Quran ) is ( also ) the Truth ( and ) confirms that ( Book as well ) which they possess . Ask ( them ) : Then why have you been killing the Prophets of Allah before this if you ( really ) believe ( but in your own Book ) ?
And ( the fact remains that ) Musa ( [ Moses ] himself ) brought you clear Signs . Then you took the calf as god after him . And you are but wicked ( without any doubt ) .
And when We took a firm promise from you and We raised the Mount of Sinai high above you ( saying ) : Hold fast to this ( Book ) which We have given you and listen ( to Our Commandment ) . Then ( your chiefs ) said : We have heard but not obeyed . And owing to their revolt against faith ( kufr ) , their hearts were imbued with the love of the calf .
( O Beloved , ) say ( to them ) : These utterances are ( most ) vile which your ( so - called ) faith commands you , if you believe ( in them truly ) .
Say : If in the sight of Allah the dwelling in the Hereafter is reserved for you alone and not for others , then long for death ( without any fear ) if ( you presume ) you are truthful .
But they will never long for it because of the sins ( and atrocities ) their hands have sent ahead ( or have committed already ) and Allah knows the wrongdoers full well .
And you will certainly find them the most ambitious of mankind for longevity , ( even ) more than the polytheists aspire to attain . Each one of them desires that he should be granted life of a thousand ( years ) . But even if he is granted , such a prolonged life cannot save him from the torment . And Allah is monitoring their deeds minutely .
Say : Whoever is an enemy to Jibril ( [ Gabriel ] he is doing injustice ) , because he is the one who has brought down upon your heart only by Allahs Command ( the Quran which ) confirms the preceding ( Books ) and contains ( absolute ) guidance and glad tidings for the believers .
He who is an enemy to Allah , His angels , His Messengers and Gabriel and Michael , verily Allah ( too ) is an enemy to ( these ) disbelievers .
And certainly We have sent down to you luminous Signs and none but the disobedient can deny them .
And is it ( not so ) that every time they made a promise , a party of them disregarded and threw it aside ? The fact is that most of them do not believe .
And ( likewise ) when there came to them from Allah the Messenger , ( Muhammad , blessing and peace be upon him , ) who ( originally ) confirms that Book which they ( already ) possessed , a party of these People of the Book threw the ( same ) Book of Allah ( the Torah ) behind their backs as if they did not know
( it , whereas the same Torah had brought them the good news of the holy arrival of Muhammad , blessing and peace be upon him , the Last Prophet ) .
And they ( the Jews ) pursued that ( magic as well ) which the devils used to recite during the reign of Sulaiman ( Solomon ) .
Sulaiman ( Solomon ) did not disbelieve ( any way ) .
It was in fact the devils that disbelieved .
They used to teach witchcraft to the people and ( also ) pursued that ( sorcery ) which was sent down upon the two angels named Harut and Marut in the city of Babylon .
They both did not teach anything to anyone , so much so that they would say : We are merely ( for ) trial , therefore , do not become disbelievers ( by putting faith in it ) .
In spite of that those ( Jews ) used to learn such ( magic ) from both of them by which they caused separation between husband and wife .
Yet they cannot harm anyone by this except under the Command of Allah .
And they learn only the things which are harmful to them and bring them no profit .
And surely they ( also ) knew that he who would buy this ( sorcery or disbelief ) would not have any share in the Hereafter .
And most evil is that for which they sold ( the real well - being or the success of ) their souls ( in the Hereafter ) .
Would that they knew ( the truth of ) this ( bargain ) !
But if they had believed and become God - fearing , ( even a little ) reward from Allah would have been far better ( than all these things ) . If they but knew ( this secret ) !
O Believers ! ( Seeking the kind attention of the Holy Prophet , ) do not say : Raina ( pay attention to us ) , but submit ( most humbly ) : Unzurna ( bless us with your benevolent gaze ! ) , and be all ears ( towards his gracious discourse ) . And there is grievous torment for the disbelievers .
Neither the disbelievers among the People of the Book nor the polytheists like that any blessing should descend upon you from your Lord . And Allah especially chooses whom He pleases for His Mercy . And Allah possesses Infinite Bounties .
When We abrogate some verse or cause it to be forgotten , ( in either case ) We bring ( some other verse ) better than or similar to it . Do you not know that Allah has ( Absolute ) Control over everything ?
Do you not know that the sovereignty of the heavens and the earth belongs to Allah alone , and that you have neither any friend nor helper aside from Allah ?
( O Muslims ! ) Do you also want to ask your Messenger ( blessing and peace be upon him ) questions the way Musa ( Moses ) was asked before ? So he who changes belief for disbelief , for sure , loses the right path .
Many of the People of the Book desire to turn you back to disbelief after you have believed because of the jealousy they have in their hearts , despite the fact that the Truth has become evident to them . So keep forbearing and overlooking till Allah sends His Command . Verily Allah has ( Absolute ) Control over everything .
And ( always ) establish Prayer and pay Zakat ( the Alms - due ) regularly . And whatever virtue you will send ahead , you shall find it with Allah . Surely Allah is watching all that you are doing .
And ( the People of the Book ) say : No one will enter Paradise except he who is a Jew or a Christian . These are their false hopes . Say : Produce your proof ( in favour of this desire ) if you are rightful ( in your claim ) .
Yes , of course , he who submits his face to Allah ( i . e . consigns himself to Allah ) and becomes a man of excellence in piety , he will find his reward with his Lord . Such people will neither fear anything nor grieve .
And the Jews say : The Christians do not have their base upon anything ( i . e . sound faith ) , and the Christians say : The Jews do not have their base upon anything , yet they ( all ) read the Book ( revealed by Allah ) .
Likewise , they ( the polytheists ) who do not have any ( heavenly ) knowledge ( at all ) also make statements like theirs .
So Allah will ( Himself ) judge between them on the Day of Resurrection in the matter in which they differ .
And who is more unjust than he who forbids remembering Allahs Name in His mosques and strives to desolate them ? It was not proper for them to enter the mosques but fearing ( Allah ) . For them is disgrace in this world and ( also ) there is a dreadful torment for them in the Hereafter .
And the East and the West ( all ) belong to Allah alone . So whichever direction you turn to , there is the Presence of Allah ( i . e . the Essence of Allah is radiantly manifest in all directions ) . Surely Allah is Infinite , All - Knowing .
And they say : Allah has begotten a son for Himself , while Holy and Transcendent is He , far above ( this ) . Rather ( all ) that is in the heavens and in the earth is His ( Creation and belonging and ) all are subservient to Him .
He is the One Who has created the heavens and the earth and when He wills to ( originate ) a thing , He only says to it : Be , and it becomes .
And those who lack knowledge say : Why does Allah not speak to us or why does any Sign not come to us ( directly ) ? Likewise the people before them also said words similar to theirs . The hearts of ( all ) these people are alike . We have indeed made the Signs explicit for those whose faith is firm .
( O Esteemed Beloved ! ) We have certainly sent you with the Truth as a Bearer of good news and as a Warner . And you will not be asked about the inmates of Hell .
And the Jews and the Christians shall , by no means , be pleased with you ( till ) you follow their religion . Say : Surely , the guidance ( given ) by Allah only is the ( real ) guidance .
( Said for the education of the Umma [ the Community ] : ) And , ( supposing the impossible , ) if you follow their desires after that knowledge which has come to you ( from Allah ) then there will not be any friend or helper for you to protect you from Allah .
( Also there are people ) whom We gave the Book . They recite it as it ought to be recited . It is these people who believe in it ( the Book ) . And those who deny it , it is they who are the losers .
O Children of Yaqub ( Jacob ) ! Remember My favour that I bestowed upon you and ( especially ) the supremacy which I awarded you over all the communities ( of that age ) .
And fear that Day when no soul shall be able to recompense anything on behalf of another ; nor shall any ransom be accepted from him ( to deliver himself ) ; nor shall any intercession benefit him ( without Allahs permission ) and nor shall they be helped ( against the Command of Allah ) .
And ( call to mind ) when the Lord of Ibrahim ( Abraham ) tested him with several commands which he fulfilled . ( On this ) Allah said : I am going to make you the leader of mankind . He submitted : And from my children as well ? Allah said : ( Yes , but ) My promise does not apply to the transgressors .
And ( remember ) when We made this House ( the Kaba ) a central place for mankind to turn to ( and assemble ) and a sanctuary for peace and ( commanded : ) Make the place where Ibrahim ( Abraham ) stood as a place of Prayer . And We urged Ibrahim and Ismail ( Abraham and Ishmael ) : Purify ( cleanse ) My House for those who circumambulate it and those who go into retreat and those who kneel down and prostrate themselves .
And when Ibrahim ( Abraham ) prayed : O my Lord , make it a city of peace and bless its residents with a variety of fruits , ( i . e . ) those of them who believe in Allah and the Last Day . ( Allah ) said : And as for him who disbelieves , I shall also grant him enjoyment ( for ) a short span of life , then ( for his disbelief ) shall drive him to the torment of Hell . And that is an extremely evil destination .
And ( recall the time ) when Ibrahim and Ismail ( Abraham and Ishmael ) were raising the foundations of the Kaba ( they were praying : ) O our Lord , accept this ( humble service ) from us . You are , indeed , All - Hearing , All - Knowing .
O our Lord ! Make both of us submissive to Your Command ; and raise out of our future generations an Umma ( a Community ) exclusively obedient to You ; and teach us our ways of worship ( and Pilgrimage ) and turn to us ( with Mercy and Forgiveness ) . Verily , it is You Who are Most Relenting , Ever - Merciful .
O our Lord ! Raise up from among them the ( Last and the Exalted ) Messenger ( i . e . Muhammad blessings and peace be upon him ) , who shall recite to them Your Revelations , and teach them the Book and wisdom ( logic and good judgment , making them Gnostics of the Divine Secret ) and purify and sanctify well ( their hearts and ill - commanding selves ) .
Certainly You alone are the All - Mighty , All - Wise .
And who turns away from the religion of Ibrahim ( Abraham ) except he who has engaged himself in foolishness . And surely We did choose him in the worldly life and certainly in the Hereafter ( too ) he will be among the high - ranking intimate companions .
And when his Lord commanded him : Bow down ( before Me ) , he submitted : I bow down before the Lord of all the worlds .
And Ibrahim ( Abraham ) enjoined , by way of will , the same thing upon his sons and ( so did ) Yaqub ( Jacob ) : O my sons , verily , Allah has chosen for you the ( true ) Din ( Religion ) of Islam ) . So , ( come what may ) die not but as Muslims persevering with faith .
Were you present ( at the time ) when death approached Yaqub ( Jacob ) when he asked his sons : Whom will you worship after ( my passing away ) ? They said : We shall worship your God , the God of your ancestors Ibrahim ( Abraham ) and Ismail ( Ishmael ) and Ishaq ( Isaac ) , Who is the One and Only God ; and we ( all ) shall remain obedient to Him .
They were an Umma ( Community ) who have passed away . They will have what they earned and you will have what you earn . And you will not be questioned about their doings .
And ( the People of the Book ) say : Become Jews or Christians , then you will be guided aright . Say : ( Nay , not so ; ) the truth is that we have embraced the religion of Ibrahim ( Abraham ) who , far from every falsehood , had turned absolutely to Allah alone . And he was not of the polytheists .
( O Muslims ! ) Say : We believe in Allah and in that ( Book ) which has been revealed to us and ( also ) that which was revealed to Ibrahim ( Abraham ) and Ismail ( Ishmael ) and Ishaq ( Isaac ) and Yaqub ( Jacob ) and their children and those ( Books ) too which were given to Musa ( Moses ) and Isa ( Jesus ) and ( likewise ) which were given to other Prophets by their Lord .
We do not make distinction between any of them ( in the matter of faith ) and we have submitted ourselves to Him alone ( the Only , the One God ) .
Then if they ( also ) believe the way you have believed in Him , then they will ( surely ) be guided aright . And if they turn away then ( be clear ) that they are sunk in sheer enmity . So Allah is sufficient to guard you against their evil and He is All - Hearing , All - Knowing .
( Say that we have taken on the colour from ) Allahs own colour , and whose colour is better than Allahs ? And we worship Him alone .
Say : Do you dispute with us about Allah whereas He is ( not only ) our Lord but your Lord ( too ) ? And ours are our works and yours are your works . And we are truly devoted to Him alone .
( O People of the Book ! ) Do you say that Ibrahim ( Abraham ) , Ismail ( Ishmael ) , Ishaq ( Isaac ) , Yaqub ( Jacob ) and their sons were either Jews or Christians ? Say : Who knows better , you or Allah ? And who will be more unjust than he who hides that testimony which is with him ( in the Book ) from Allah . And Allah is not unaware of your deeds .
That was a community which has passed . For them is what they earned and for you is what you will earn . And you will not be asked about their deeds .
Now the foolish will say : What has turned away these ( Muslims ) from their Qibla ( Bait al - Maqdis in Jerusalem ) to which they used to face ( before ) ? Say : The east and the west ( all ) belong to Allah alone . He guides whom He pleases to the straight path .
And , ( O Muslims , ) in the same way We made you the best Umma ( Community fair to all with a tolerant , moderate and balanced outlook ) so that you may bear witness to the people , and ( Our exalted ) Messenger bears witness to you .
And We appointed the Qibla ( direction of Prayer ) , which you used to face before , only to bring to light ( by trial ) who would follow ( Our ) Messenger and who would turn back upon his heels .
And this ( change of Qibla ) was indeed a hard task but not hard for those whom Allah blessed with guidance ( and gnosis of spiritual truths ) . And it is not Allahs Glory to void your faith ( without any reason ) . Allah is surely Most Clement , Ever - Merciful to mankind .
( O Beloved ! ) We have been watching your radiant face turning frequently towards heaven . So We will indeed make you turn towards that Qibla ( direction of Prayer ) which you feel pleased with . So turn your face towards the Sacred Mosque right now . And , ( O Muslims , ) wherever you are , turn your faces towards it .
And those who have been given the Book definitely know that this ( commandment of changing Qibla ) is the Truth from their Lord .
And Allah is not unaware of the works which they are doing .
And ( even ) if you bring every Sign to the People of the Book , they will not follow your Qibla ( direction of Prayer ) , nor will you follow their Qibla .
And do they not follow each others Qibla among themselves .
( Said for the education of the Umma [ the Community ] : ) And if , ( supposing the impossible , ) you ( also ) follow their desires after the knowledge has come to you , then you will surely be of those who wrong ( their own souls ) .
And those to whom We have given the Book recognize ( the Final ) Messenger ( the Venerable Muhammad [ blessing and peace be upon him ] and his glory and majesty ) as they doubtlessly identify their own sons .
But certainly a party of them is concealing the Truth deliberately .
( O Listener ! ) The Truth is from your Lord . So , never be of those who doubt .
And there is for everyone a ( fixed ) direction ( motive ) ; he turns to the same . So , move forward to take the lead towards the pious acts . Wherever you are , Allah will unite you all together . Surely , Allah has Absolute Control over everything .
And from wherever you move ( on a journey ) , turn your face towards the Sacred Mosque ( at the time of Prayer ) . And this indeed is the Truth from your Lord , and Allah is not unaware of your doings .
And from wherever you move ( on a journey ) , turn your face towards the Sacred Mosque ( at the time of Prayer ) and , ( O Muslims , ) wherever you are , turn your faces towards it so that people may not get a chance to raise any objection against you , except those among them who exceed limits . So , fear them not , fear Me alone , so that I complete My blessing on you and you may attain perfection in guidance .
Likewise , We have sent to you ( Our ) Messenger from among yourselves who recites to you Our Revelations and purifies and sanctifies ( your hearts and ill - commanding selves ) and teaches you the Book and inculcates in you logic and wisdom and enlightens you ( on the mysteries of spiritual gnosis and divine truth ) which you did not know .
So remember Me , I shall remember you . And always be thankful to Me and never be ungrateful to Me .
O Believers ! Always seek help ( from Me ) through patience and Prayer . Certainly , Allah is ( always ) with those who observe patience .
And do not say about those who are slain in the cause of Allah that they are dead . ( They are not dead . ) They are rather alive but you have no perception ( of their life ) .
And We will most certainly test you somewhat by means of fear and hunger and certain loss of wealth and lives and fruits . And , ( O Beloved , ) give glad tidings to those who observe patience .
( They are the ones ) who , when afflicted with some distress , say : Indeed , we too are Allahs ( belongings ) and to Him are we to return .
It is they upon whom are bestowed successive blessings and mercy from their Lord . And it is they who are the guided ones .
Verily Safa and Marwa are indeed among the Signs of Allah . So , he who performs Hajj ( Pilgrimage ) or Umra ( Visitation ) of the House of Allah , there is no sin on him if he ambulates ( i . e . walks up and down between ) the two . And if a person does a pious act out of his pleasure , then Allah is certainly Most Appreciative , Well Aware .
Surely , those who conceal the manifest Signs and guidance sent down by Us after We have revealed them clearly for the people in ( Our ) Book , it is they whom Allah curses ( i . e . deprives them of His Mercy ) and whom curse all those also who curse .
But those who repent , mend ( their ) ways and make known ( the Truth ) , so I ( too ) shall forgive them . And I am Most Relenting , Ever - Merciful .
Indeed those who disbelieved ( by concealing the Truth ) , and left this world while they were disbelievers , upon them is the curse of Allah and of the angels and of all mankind .
They shall be ( held ) under this ( curse ) forever . Their punishment shall not be mitigated . Nor shall they be given respite .
And your God is One God . There is no God but He , the Most Kind , the Ever - Merciful .
Verily in the creation of the heavens and the earth , in the alternation of the night and the day , in the ships ( and vessels ) which sail through the ocean carrying cargo , profitable for the people ,
in the ( rain ) water which Allah pours down from the sky reviving therewith the earth to life after its death , ( the earth ) in which He has scattered animals of all kinds , and in the changing wind directions and in the clouds ( that trail ) between the sky and the earth , duty - bound ( under Allahs Command ) certainly ,
( in these ) are ( many ) Signs ( of Allahs Power ) for those who put their reason to work .
And there are some among the people who take others besides Allah as His partners and love them as it is Allahs due alone . But those who believe love Allah the most ( far more intensely than anyone else ) . And if these wrongdoers happen to see that time when the torment ( of the Last Day ) will be before their eyes ( then they will become aware ) that the Master of all the forces is Allah . And certainly Allah is severe in giving punishment .
And when those ( leaders of the disbelievers ) who were followed would be disgusted with their followers and ( they all ) would see ( Allahs ) torment and all their means and resources would be cut off .
And , ( seeing this disgust , the polytheist ) followers will say : Would that we could get a chance ( to return to the world ) , then we ( too ) would turn our backs on them as they have done to us ( today ) . In this way Allah will show them their own deeds as remorse and regret . And ( no way ) shall they be able to escape from Hell .
O Mankind ! Eat of that which is lawful and pure in the earth . And do not follow in the footsteps of Satan . Verily , he is your declared enemy .
He commands you only to do what is evil and immodest and ( also ) that you should say about Allah that which you ( yourselves ) do not know .
And when it is said to them ( the disbelievers ) : Follow that which Allah has sent down , they say : ( Indeed not ! ) We shall rather follow the same ( path ) on which we found our ancestors , even though their ancestors had neither any sense nor any guidance .
The example of inviting these disbelievers ( to guidance ) is like that of a person who calls out to such ( an animal ) as hears nothing except a shout or cry . Deaf , dumb and blind , they have no sense .
O Believers ! Eat of those pure and clean things which We have provided for you and give thanks to Allah if He is the One Whom you worship ( and obey ) .
He has made unlawful for you only the dead animal and blood and the flesh of swine and that animal over which , while sacrificing , the name of someone other than Allah has been invoked . But he who is forced by necessity and is neither disobedient nor transgressor will not incur any sin on himself ( if he eats that much which is required to survive ) . Allah is , indeed , Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
Indeed those who conceal ( those verses of the Torah ) which Allah has revealed and take in exchange for that a small price eat nothing but fill their bellies with Fire . And Allah will not even speak to them nor purify them on the Day of Resurrection . And for them is painful torment .
It is they who have purchased error for guidance and torment for forgiveness . What has made them steadfast to bear the Fire ( of Hell ) ?
This is so because Allah has sent down the Book with the Truth . And indeed those who fabricate contradictions ( and antinomies ) in the Book are far ( gone from the Truth ) in rivalry .
Righteousness is not merely that you turn your faces to the East or the West . But true righteousness is that a person believes in Allah , the Last Day , the angels , the Book ( revealed by Allah ) and the Messengers .
Driven by love for Allah , he spends ( his ) wealth on the kindred , orphans , the needy , the wayfarers , and those who ask and in ( liberating slaves ) necks ; and establishes Prayer and pays Zakat ( the Alms - due ) .
And when they make a promise , they fulfil it and are steadfast in hardship ( poverty ) and suffering ( ailment ) and at the time of fierce fighting ( Jihad ) .
It is these who are truthful and it is these who are righteous .
O Believers ! Retribution ( the law of equality in punishment ) is prescribed for you in the case of those who are unjustly slain : a free man for a free man , a slave for a slave and a woman for a woman .
Then , if he ( the murderer ) is granted some remission ( in retribution ) by his brother ( the victims heir ) , that should be executed fairly according to the law , and ( retribution ) should be paid ( to the heirs of the slain ) in a graceful manner .
This is a concession and kindness from your Lord . So , anyone who transgresses after that , for him there is painful torment .
And there is a ( guarantee of ) life for you in retribution ( i . e . vengeance of murder ) , O wise people , so that you may guard ( against bloodshed and destruction ) .
It is prescribed for you that when death approaches someone of you and he leaves some property behind , then he is to make a will for ( his ) parents and kindred in a reasonable manner . This is imperative for the true believers .
Then he who alters this ( will ) after hearing it , its sin will be on those who alter it . Allah is indeed All - Hearing , All - Knowing .
So , if a person fears any partiality by a testator ( for someone ) or injustice ( towards some other ) and then he brings about reconciliation among them , it shall be no sin on him . Verily Allah is Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
O Believers ! Fasting is prescribed for you as it was prescribed for the people before you so that you may become pious .
( These are ) a fixed number of days . So , whoever among you is ill or on a journey , then he shall complete fasting for the fixed number by ( fasting on ) other days . But those who are not able to fast , obligatory on them is to provide food for a needy person in lieu of that . But whoever does ( greater ) good seeking pleasure that is better for him . And your fasting is better for you if you understand .
The month of Ramadan ( is that ) in which the Quran has been sent down as guidance for mankind containing clear Signs which lead ( to the straight road ) and distinguish ( the Truth from falsehood ) . Therefore , he who witnesses this month must fast it , and he who is ill or on a journey should complete the count by ( fasting on equal number of ) other days .
Allah desires ease for you and does not desire hardship for you so that you complete the prescribed number of fasting days , and that you glorify Him for the guidance which He has blessed you with , and that you may become grateful .
And , ( O Beloved , ) when My servants ask you about Me , ( tell them : ) I am near . I reply the call of the supplicant whenever he calls Me out . So they should embrace My obedience and have ( firm ) faith in Me so that they may find the ( coveted ) road ( leading straight to the destination ) .
It is made lawful for you to approach your wives during the nights of the fasts .
They are like clothes for you and you are like clothes for them .
Allah knows that you broke the trust in the case of your own right .
But He has shown Mercy to you and has forgiven you .
So , have sexual relations with them now ( during the nights of the fasts without any inhibition ) and seek what Allah has prescribed for you .
And eat and drink until the white thread of dawn becomes distinct to you ( separated ) from the black thread ( of night ) .
Then complete the fast till dusk .
And refrain from having sexual contact with your wives while you are in retreat in the mosques .
These are the bounds ( set ) by Allah . So do not draw near to them ( to step over ) .
Thus Allah explains His Verses ( clearly ) for the people so that they may embrace piety .
And do not eat up one anothers wealth among yourselves through injustice , nor take wealth to the authorities ( as a bribe ) so that , this way , you may ( also ) swallow a portion of others wealth unfairly , while you are aware ( that this is a sin ) .
( O Beloved ! ) People ask you about the new moons . Say : These are Signs to indicate time for the people and for ( determining ) the month of Hajj ( Pilgrimage ) . And it is no righteousness that you enter your houses from the rear ( while in Ihram - the sacred dress for Hajj [ Pilgrimage ] ) . In fact righteousness is doing pious acts ( instead of observing such meaningless customs ) . And enter your houses through their ( entrance ) doors , and always fear Allah so that you may prosper .
And fight in the cause of Allah against those who fight against you . ( Yes , ) but do not exceed limits . Surely Allah does not like those who exceed limits .
And ( during war ) kill ( the disbelievers ) wherever you find them , and drive them out from where they drove you out . And rousing mischief and disruption is a severer ( crime ) than killing . But do not fight against them in the proximity of the Sacred Mosque ( Kaba ) unless they themselves fight there against you .
Then if they attack you , kill them , for that is the right penalty of ( such ) disbelievers .
But if they desist , then surely Allah is Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
And keep fighting against them until the disruption and mischief is totally eliminated and Din ( the complete system of life and submission ) practically becomes subservient to Allah alone . But if they desist , then offensive action is not permissible except against the wrongdoers .
A sacred month is the requital of a sacred month and ( other ) sacred things also requite one another . So if someone wrongs you , you may also wrong him but proportional to his offense . And fear Allah . And remember that Allah is with those who fear Him .
And spend in the cause of Allah ; and do not cast yourselves into destruction with your own hands ; and adopt righteousness . Verily , Allah loves the righteous .
And accomplish ( the ceremonies of ) Hajj ( Pilgrimage ) and Umra ( Visitation ) for Allah . But if you are prevented ( in the way ) , then ( send for slaughter ) whatever sacrificial animal is available .
And do not shave your heads until the sacrificial animal has reached its place . But whoever among you is ill or suffers from some ailment of head ( and because of that gets his head shaved before time ) , then he has to recompense ( it ) by ( keeping ) the fast or ( giving ) alms or ( offering ) sacrifice .
Then , when in peaceful condition , anyone of you who takes the advantage of combining Umra ( Visitation ) with Hajj ( Pilgrimage ) should ( offer whatever ) sacrifice is available . However , the one who fails to manage even this has to fast for three days during Hajj ( [ Pilgrimage ] days ) and for seven days on returning from Hajj , making ten days ( fasting ) in all .
This ( relaxation ) is meant for the one whose family does not reside in the vicinity of the Sacred Mosque ( i . e . not a resident of Makka ) . And fear Allah . And remember that Allah gives severe punishment .
Some months are appointed for Hajj ( Pilgrimage : Shawwal , Dhul - Qada and first ten days of Dhul - Hijja ) .
So , he who undertakes to perform Hajj ( Pilgrimage ) during these ( months ) and makes it obligatory ( for himself ) , then he must neither commit sexual intercourse with the women nor any ( other ) sin and nor should he quarrel with anyone during Hajj ( Pilgrimage ) days .
And whatever good you do Allah knows it well .
And collect the provisions required for the journey ( to the Hereafter ) .
And surely the best of provisions is the fear of Allah . So , fear Me , O men of sound judgment !
And it is no sin on you if you seek ( also ) your Lords bounty ( through trade during Hajj [ Pilgrimage ] days ) . Then when you return from Arafat , celebrate the remembrance of Allah near Mashar al - Haram ( Muzdalifa ) . And remember Him as He has guided you . And you were certainly wandering disorientated before .
Then return after going to that very place from where ( the other ) people return . And beg from Allah forgiveness ( earnestly ) . Allah is , of course , Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
Then , when you have completed the ceremonies of Hajj ( Pilgrimage ) , celebrate the remembrance of Allah most fervently ( at Mina ) , as you remember your fathers and forefathers ( with great fondness ) , or remember ( Allah ) even with deeper intensity of fondness . There are some of the people who say : O our Lord , grant us benefits in this ( very ) world . For such there is no share in the Hereafter .
And there are others of them who submit : O our Lord , grant us excellence in this world , and excellence in the Hereafter ( as well ) , and save us from the torment of Hell .
It is they for whom there is a share of their ( virtuous ) earning , and Allah is Swift at reckoning .
And remember Allah ( the most ) during ( these ) numbered days . Then , if someone hastens just in two days ( to return from Mina ) , it is no sin on him and he who delays ( it ) also commits no sin . This is for him who embraces piety . And keep fearing Allah and remember that all of you shall be assembled before Him .
And among people there is also someone whose conversation seems to you pleasing in the life of the world and who calls Allah to witness that which is in his heart , but in truth he is most quarrelsome .
And when he turns away ( from you ) , he runs about in the land to do ( everything possible ) to rouse mischief and destroy crops and life . And Allah does not like mischief and violence .
And when it is said to him ( on account of this tyranny and violence ) : Fear Allah , his arrogance stimulates him for more sins . Hell is , therefore , sufficient for him . And that is indeed an evil abode .
And ( on the contrary ) among people there is also someone who sells even his life to attain the pleasure of Allah . And Allah is Most Kind to the servants .
O Believers ! Enter Islam perfectly and wholly and do not follow in the footsteps of Satan . He is certainly your declared enemy .
And if you err even after Our clear Signs have come to you , then bear in mind that Allah is All - Mighty , All - Wise .
Are they waiting only for ( the torment of ) Allah to come in the coverings of clouds , and also the angels ( to descend ) , and the ( whole ) affair is settled ? And to Allah will all matters be returned .
Ask the Children of Israel how many a Clear Sign We gave them ! But he who alters Allahs Bounty after it has reached him then Allah surely inflicts severe torment .
The worldly life has been quite adorned and beautified for the disbelievers . And they make fun of the believers . But those who have embraced God - wariness will rank far superior to them on the Day of Resurrection . And Allah gives without measure to whom He wills .
( In the beginning ) all the people agreed upon the same Din ( Religion . Later , when differences emerged among them , ) Allah sent His Messengers as Bearers of good news and Warners and sent down with them the Book based on Truth , so that it might judge those matters among the people in which they had developed differences .
Then only those very people whom the Book was given differed about it , despite the fact that the clear Signs had come to them .
( And they differed also ) because of mere jealousy and malice among themselves .
Then Allah , by His Command , made the believers understand that matter of Truth about which they had differed .
And Allah guides whom He pleases to the straight road .
Do you think that you will enter Paradise ( for nothing , without any trial , ) while you have not yet undergone the predicament of those who passed away before you ? They were afflicted with a diversity of sufferings and hardships and were jolted ( in such a manner ) that the Messenger ( himself ) and his Companions of faith ( too ) cried out : When will the help of Allah arrive ? Beware ! The help of Allah is definitely at hand .
They ask you what they should spend ( in the way of Allah ) . Say : Whatever wealth you spend ( is right ) , but the deserving ones are your parents , and near relatives , and orphans , and the needy and the wayfarers . And whatever good you do , Allah indeed knows it full well .
Fighting ( for the cause of Allah ) has been made incumbent upon you although you are averse to it by temperament . It may be that you dislike a thing and ( in fact ) that is good for you . And it is ( also ) likely that you like a thing but ( in fact ) that is bad for you . And Allah knows well but you do not know .
They ask you about the command for fighting in the Sacred Month . Say : Fighting in it is a grave sin but hindering people from Allahs path and denying Him and obstructing them from al - Masjid al - Haram ( Kaba ) and turning its dwellers out of it is yet a graver sin ( than that ) in the sight of Allah . And this mischief - mongering is even worse than bloodshed .
( These disbelievers ) will continue fighting against you endlessly till they turn you back from your Din ( Religion ) if they become capable to gain ( the required ) might .
And whoever of you turns away from his Din ( Religion ) and dies as a disbeliever , ( all ) deeds of such people will become void in this world and in the Hereafter .
And it is they who are the inmates of Hell . They shall live in it forever .
Indeed those who believed and migrated for the sake of Allah and struggled hard in the way of Allah , it is they who look forward to Allahs Mercy . And Allah is Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
They ask you about liquor and gambling . Say : Major sin lies in both of them and also some ( worldly ) profit for the people but their sin is greater than their profit . And they also ask you about what they should spend . Say : ( Spend ) whatever is surplus to your needs . Thus does Allah make His Commandments clear to you so that you may meditate .
( Your meditation should be ) on ( matters relating to ) this world and the Hereafter . And they ask you about orphans . Say : It is meritorious to set ( their affairs ) right . And if you associate them with yourselves ( in subsistence and business ) , then they are also your brothers . And Allah distinctly recognizes the one who is destructive from the other who is constructive . And if Allah willed , He would put you in distress . Verily Allah is All - Mighty , All - Wise .
And do not marry idolatrous women until they become Muslims . Indeed a Muslim slave - girl is better than a ( free ) idolatress , however pleasing she may seem to you . Nor give ( the Muslim women ) in marriage to idolaters till they embrace Islam . And certainly a Muslim slave is better than an idolater , even though he should please you . These ( idolaters and disbelievers ) call you to Hell while Allah invites , by His Decree , to Paradise and Forgiveness and explains His Verses clearly to people so that they may take direction and guidance .
And they ask you about menstruation ( monthly course ) . Say : It is filth ; so keep away from women during menstruation and do not approach them until they become pure . And when they have washed themselves clean , consort with them the way by which Allah has permitted you . Undoubtedly , Allah loves those who repent excessively , and He loves those who keep themselves thoroughly pure and clean .
Your wives are for you like a harvest producing field . So , go to your field as you may desire . And manage some provisions for yourselves for the next world . Inculcate in yourselves Allahs fear and be mindful that you have to appear before Him . And , ( O Beloved , ) give good news to the believers ( that their appearance before Allah will be gainful for them ) .
And because of your oaths , do not use ( the Name of ) Allah as an excuse for refraining from doing good ( to the people ) , becoming God - fearing and making peace among people . And Allah is All - Hearing , All - Knowing .
Allah will not hold you accountable for your vain oaths but will take you to task for the oaths taken with serious intention in your hearts . And Allah is Most Forgiving , Most Forbearing .
And for those who swear not to go near their wives , there is a ( reconsideration ) period of four months . So , if ( during this period ) they resume their relations , Allah is Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
But if they resolve firmly to divorce , then certainly Allah is All - Hearing , All - Knowing .
And the divorced women shall hold back themselves till three menstrual cycles . And it is not lawful for them to conceal what Allah may have created in their wombs , if they believe in Allah and the Last Day . And during this period , their husbands have a greater right to take them back ( again ) into conjugal bond , provided they intend to reconcile .
And , according to usage , women too have rights over men similar to the rights of men over women .
Men , however , have an advantage over them . And Allah is All - Mighty , Most Wise .
Divorce is ( revocable ) two times ( only ) . Then either retain ( the wife ) with honour ( in marital relationship ) or release her with kindness . And it is not lawful for you to take back anything of that which you have given them , unless both fear that ( now by maintaining marital ties ) they may not be able to observe the limits set by Allah .
So if you fear that both will be unable to keep within Allahs limits , then ( in that case ) there shall be no sin upon either of them if the wife ( herself ) may give up something as recompense to free herself ( from this distressing bond ) .
These are the limits ( set ) by Allah . So , do not exceed them . And those who exceed the limits prescribed by Allah , it is they who are the wrongdoers .
Then if he divorces ( for the third time ) , she will not be lawful for him until she marries some husband other than him .
But if he ( the latter ) also divorces her , in such case there shall be no sin on both of them ( the former husband and the wife ) if they return ( once more to the wedlock ) , provided both of them ( now ) think that they would be able to observe the limits set by Allah .
These are the limits ( prescribed ) by Allah which He explains to those who have knowledge .
And when you divorce the women and they reach ( the completion of ) their waiting period , then either retain them ( in marital bond ) in a graceful manner or release them nicely .
But do not retain them to hurt so that you subject ( them ) to excesses .
And he who does so wrongs his own soul .
And do not make fun of Allahs Commands .
And call to mind Allahs favour that has been ( bestowed ) upon you and the Book that He has sent down to you and ( the pearls of ) wisdom ( on which He has enlightened you ) .
He advises you ( by means of this code of conduct ) .
And fear Allah and bear in mind that Allah is indeed All - Knowing .
And when you divorce the women and they reach ( the completion of ) their waiting period , then do not prevent them from remarrying ( their former or latter ) husbands when they have mutually agreed according to the Islamic Law . This is a direction for him among you who believes in Allah and the Last Day . It is most pure , clean and wholesome for you . And Allah knows and you do not know ( so many things ) .
And the mothers shall suckle their infants for two full years . This ( injunction ) is for him who wants to complete the suckling period .
According to usage , the food and clothing of the feeding mothers is the obligation of the father of the child .
No soul should be stressed beyond its capacity ( and ) neither the mother nor the father should be harmed for the child .
The same injunction is applicable to the heirs .
Then if the mother and the father both desire with mutual consultation and consent to wean ( even before the fixed two years ) there will be no sin on them .
Nor shall it be a sin if you intend to engage ( a wet nurse ) for suckling the child , while you pay them whatever you do according to usage .
And fear Allah and know that Allah is watchful of all that you do .
And those of you who die and leave ( their ) widows behind shall keep themselves in waiting for four months and ten days . So , when they arrive at ( the end of ) their waiting term , there shall be no responsibility on you for whatever they do for themselves according to Islamic Law . And Allah is Well Aware of what you do .
And there is no sin on you if ( even during the waiting term ) you convey to such women a hint of marriage proposal or conceal ( this idea ) in your hearts . Allah knows that you will soon mention to them but do not seek from them any ( such ) promise even secretly , except that you say to them ( a hint of ) that according to Islamic Law . And do not resolve firmly on wedlock ( during this time ) until the prescribed waiting term is over . And know that Allah also knows what is in your hearts . So fear Him persistently . And ( also ) know that Allah is Most Forgiving , Most Lenient .
There will ( also ) be no sin on you if you divorce ( the wedlocked ) women even before touching them or fixing their dower . Then ( in this case ) provide for them appropriately . It is ( an obligation ) for the rich according to his means and for the poor according to his means . ( In any case ) this provision must be made in a becoming manner . This is compulsory for the pious .
And if you divorce them before you have touched them after you have fixed a dower for them , then paying half of the dower you have fixed is necessary , unless they forgo ( their right ) themselves , or the ( husband ) in whose hand is the marriage tie forgoes ( i . e . pays more than half or full ) . And , ( O male folk , ) if you forgo , that is closer to God - wariness . And never forget extending generosity ( and behaving excellently ) towards each other ( even in these moments of stress and strain ) . Verily , Allah observes well what you do .
Guard strictly all the Prayers , especially the middle prayer . And stand before Allah as an epitome of submissiveness and lowliness .
Should you be in a state of fear , then ( do offer Prayer ) whether on foot or while riding ( as the case may be ) , but once you get back to peace , remember Allah in the manner He has taught you which you did not know ( before ) .
And those of you who die and leave ( their ) widows behind must leave a will for their widows ( before they die ) to provide them for their maintenance for one year ( and ) not to turn them out of their houses .
But if they themselves walk out ( on their own ) then there is no sin on you for whatever they may do for themselves according to usage . And Allah is Almighty , Most Wise .
And the divorced women must also be provided with maintenance according to what is fair . This is compulsory for the pious .
Thus Allah makes His Commandments clear to you so that you may understand .
( O Beloved ! ) Have you not seen the people who went out of their houses fearing death though they were in thousands ? Allah commanded them : Die , ( and they died ) . Then He restored them to life . Surely Allah is Most Bountiful towards mankind , but most of them do not give ( Him ) thanks .
And , ( O Muslims , ) fight in the way of Allah and know that Allah is All - Hearing , All - Knowing .
Who is he that will lend to Allah a generous loan ? He will , then , multiply it for him manifold . And Allah it is Who decreases and increases ( your sustenance ) and towards Him will you be returned .
( O Beloved ! ) Have you not seen the group of the Children of Israel who came after Musa ( Moses ) ?
When they said to their Prophet : Appoint for us a king so that we may fight in the cause of Allah ( under his command ) ,
the Prophet said ( to them ) : What , if you desist from fighting once it is prescribed for you !
They said : What ails us that we should not fight in the cause of Allah when we have been driven away from our homes and children ?
But when fighting was made obligatory for them , all of them turned away , except a few .
And Allah knows the wrongdoers full well .
And their Prophet said to them : Allah has appointed for you Talut ( Saul ) as a king .
They said : How can he reign over us whereas we have greater right than him to rule , and he has also not been granted affluence .
( The Prophet ) said : Surely Allah has chosen him above you , and has given him more affluent knowledge and vigour ;
and Allah ( entrusts ) with His kingdom whom He pleases and Allah is Infinite , All - Knowing .
And their Prophet said to them : The sign of his kingdom ( to be Allahs bestowal ) is that a box , carried by angels , shall come to you from your Lord , containing things for tranquillity of heart , and some sacred relics left behind by children of Musa and Harun ( Moses and Aaron ) . Surely there is in it a great sign for you if you are believers .
So , when Talut ( Saul ) marched out of the city with his troops , he said : Surely , Allah will try you by means of a stream . So he who drinks from it will not be ( of my companions ) , and he who does not drink it will be of ( my party ) , but if someone takes ( only ) a sip of it from the hollow of his hand , ( there is no harm ) .
Yet , they all drank of it except a few .
So , when Talut ( Saul ) and his companions in faith crossed the stream they said : We have no strength today to face Jalut ( Goliath ) and his forces .
( But ) those who were sure that ( after martyrdom or death ) they were going to meet Allah said : Many a time a small party has overcome a ( very ) large party by the Command of Allah ! And Allah awards His companionship to the steadfast .
And when they faced Jalut ( Goliath ) and his forces , they supplicated Allah : O our Lord , grant us plentiful patience and make our steps firm and give us victory over the disbelievers .
So they defeated them ( the army of Jalut [ Goliath ] ) by Allahs Command and Dawud ( David ) killed Jalut . And Allah granted ( Dawud ) sovereignty and wisdom and taught him what He wished . If Allah had not removed one group by means of another , ( the human life on ) earth would have been ruined ( due to persistent suppression and oppression by tyrants ) . But Allah is Bountiful to all the worlds .
These are Allahs Verses . ( O Beloved ! ) We recite them to you with the Truth and indeed you are of the Messengers .
Of all these Messengers ( whom We sent ) We have exalted some above others : Allah spoke to some of them ( directly ) , and raised some ( above all others ) in rank ( i . e . elevated the Holy Prophet [ Allah bless him and give him peace ] to the highest of all the degrees of the glory of Messengership ) . And We gave Isa son of Maryam ( Jesus son of Mary ) , clear Signs and helped him with the Holy Spirit .
And had Allah so willed , the people succeeding these Messengers would never have disputed and fought among themselves , after the manifest Signs had come to them . But they differed ( owing to the free will which was endowed to them to be answerable before Allah for their performance ) . So , some of them believed while others opted to disbelieve .
( And keep it in mind that ) if Allah had willed ( i . e . restricted their choice to one opinion only ) they would never have fought among themselves . But Allah does what He desires .
O Believers ! Spend ( in the cause of Allah ) out of whatever We have provided for you , before the Day comes when there will be no trading ; and ( for disbelievers ) neither any friendship ( will be useful ) nor ( any ) intercession ; and it is the disbelievers who are the transgressors .
Allah ! None is worthy of worship but He , the Ever - Living , the Self - Subsisting , the One Who sustains and protects ( the entire universe with His Strategy ) . He is seized by neither slumber nor sleep . Whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth belongs to Him alone . Who can dare intercede with Him except by His permission ? ( He ) knows all that is ( happening or has happened ) before the Creation and all that is ( about to happen ) after them ; and they cannot encompass anything of His knowledge except that which He wills . His Throne ( of Empire and Power and Authority ) encompasses the heavens and the earth , and the protection of both ( the earth and the heavens ) does not pose Him any difficulty . He alone is Most High , Most Great .
There is no compulsion in Din ( Religion ) . Surely the guidance has been evidently distinguished from error . So he who rejects false gods and believes in Allah has grasped such a firm handhold that will never ( possibly ) give way . And Allah is All - Hearing , All - Knowing .
Allah is the Guardian of the believers . He brings them out of ( all kinds of ) darkness and takes them towards the light . And those who are disbelievers , their supporters are satans who take them out of the light ( of Truth ) into the darkness ( of evil ) . It is they who are the inmates of Hell . They will stay there forever .
( O Beloved ! ) Have you not seen him who began to dispute with Ibrahim ( Abraham ) about his own Lord because Allah had given him kingdom ? When Ibrahim ( Abraham ) said : My Lord is He Who gives life and ( also ) causes death , ( the king ) said ( in reply ) : I ( too ) give life and cause death . Ibrahim ( Abraham ) said : Surely , Allah causes the sun to rise in the east ; bring it up from the west . So , the infidel was stunned . And Allah does not guide the transgressors to the right path .
Or , likewise , ( have you not seen ) him who passed by a town which was a wreck with its roofs caved in ? He said : How shall Allah bring it back to life after its death ? So ( to make him witness His Power ) Allah kept him dead for a hundred years , then gave him life , ( and after that ) asked : How long ( have ) you stayed here ( after dying ) ?
He said : I stayed for a day or ( only ) part of a day . Allah said : ( Nay , ) you kept lying for a hundred years . So , ( now ) look at ( the provisions of ) your food and drink . ( They ) have not even decomposed ( i . e . become stale ) . And ( now ) see your donkey ( whose very bones are no more intact ) .
And this is because We may make you a Sign ( of Our Might ) for the people . And ( now ) see ( these ) bones how We stir ( and raise ) them and clothe them with flesh . When this ( phenomenon ) fully dawned on him , he proclaimed : I have learnt ( through the eye of certitude ) that Allah is indeed All - Powerful to do everything .
And ( also recall the event ) when Ibrahim ( Abraham ) said : My Lord , show me how You bring the dead to life . Allah said : Do you not have faith ? He submitted : Why not ! ( I do believe , ) but ( I wish ) my heart is blessed with gratifying calm . Allah ordained : Well , take four birds and tame them to feel attached to you ; then ( slaughter them and ) place a piece of each of them on each hill ; then call them . They will come to you at high speed . And know that surely Allah is All - Mighty , All - Wise .
The example of those who spend their wealth in the way of Allah is like ( that ) grain out of which seven ears shoot forth . ( And then ) each ear bears a hundred grains ( i . e . they are rewarded seven hundred times ) . And Allah multiplies ( still more ) for whom He likes . And Allah is Infinite , All - Knowing .
Those who spend their wealth in the cause of Allah , and then do not follow up their spending by reminding of their benevolence or by hurting , there is reward for them with their Lord . And ( on the Day of Resurrection ) they shall have no fear , nor shall they grieve .
Polite conversation ( with the needy ) and extending tolerance are far better than charity followed by injuring ( his ) heart . And Allah is Self - Sufficient , Forbearing .
O Believers ! Do not ruin your charity donations ( later ) by taunts of doing favour and hurting feelings like the one who gives charity to show off his wealth to the people and believes in neither Allah nor the Last Day . His case is like a smooth rock covered with a thin coat of soil . Then heavy rain falls on it , washes it clean and leaves it ( the same ) bare and hard ( rock ) . So these ( pretentious people ) shall get nothing out of their earning . And Allah does not guide the disbelievers .
And those who spend their wealth to seek Allahs pleasure and stabilize themselves ( in faith and obedience ) are like a garden located on a higher ground level . When a heavy rain falls on it , it doubles its yield . And if it does not receive a heavy rain then even dew ( or drizzle ) is sufficient . And Allah monitors your actions minutely .
Would anyone of you like to have a garden of date - palms and grapevines with streams flowing beneath it and all kinds of fruit ( in addition to dates and grapes ) ; and ( under these conditions ) old age overtakes him while his children are ( still ) tender ; and ( in the meanwhile ) the garden is struck with a whirlwind composed ( entirely ) of fire and gets burnt ? ( Imagine the state of his helplessness , agony and anxiety . ) Thus Allah makes clear His Signs for you so that you may reflect . ( So , do you wish that the orchard of your deeds should also burn to ashes in the fire of pretentiousness on the Last Day and there should be none to support you ? )
O Believers ! Spend ( in the way of Allah ) of your lawful and clean earnings and of that which We bring forth for you from the earth . And do not intend to spend ( in the cause of Allah ) from that which is unclean , for ( if the same is given to you ) you yourself would never accept it without closing your eyes to it . And you mustknow that Allah is certainly All - Sufficient , Worthy of All Praise .
Satan makes you afraid of poverty ( to stop you from spending in the way of Allah ) and enjoins you to commit indecency . And Allah promises you His forgiveness and bounty . And Allah is All - Embracing , All - Knowing .
He blesses with wisdom whom He wills . And he who is granted wisdom ( and reason ) receives tremendous good . And only those who are endowed with wisdom and insight receive direction and guidance .
And whatever you spend or whatever you vow to offer , Allah verily knows it and the evildoers have no helpers .
If you give charity in public , it is worthwhile ( for it will persuade others ) , but if you hide and deliver it to the poor in secret that is ( far ) better for you . And Allah will remove from you some of your sins ( due to this charity ) . And Allah is Aware of all that you do .
Their ( acceptance ) of guidance is not your responsibility . It is Allah Who awards guidance whom He wills . And whatever wealth you give away ( as charity donation ) goes to your own benefit . It is not appropriate for you to spend but for Allahs pleasure alone . And whatever you spend of your wealth , ( its reward ) will be paid back to you in full and you shall not be treated unjustly .
( Charity is ) the right of those poor who have been restricted ( from earning their livelihood ) in the cause of Allah . They cannot even move about in the land ( due to their whole time involvement in matters of Din [ Religion ] ) . Because of their ( ascetic ) aversion to greed , the unwise ( knowing little about their state of heart and soul ) consider them wealthy . You will recognize them from their appearance . They do not ask people ( for help ) at all lest they should humble themselves ( before them ) . And whatever wealth you give in charity , Allah indeed knows it well .
Those who spend ( in the cause of Allah ) privately or publicly , by night and day , have their reward with their Lord . And ( on the Day of Resurrection ) they shall neither fear nor grieve .
Those who live on usury will not be able to stand ( on the Day of Judgment ) but like the one whom Satan has made insane with his touch ( damnation ) . This is because they used to say that trade ( buying and selling ) is similar to usury whereas Allah has declared trading ( buying and selling ) lawful and usury unlawful . So , if someone refrained ( from usury ) on receiving admonition from his Lord , then he can keep whatever he took in the past and his case is with Allah . But those who continued with usury ( despite the admonition ) would be the inmates of Hell . There will they stay permanently .
Allah eliminates usury ( i . e . deprives usurious profits of prosperous growth ) and multiplies alms gifts ( i . e . increases blessings of clean wealth manifold through charity donations ) . And Allah does not like anyone who is ungrateful and disobedient .
Surely those who believe and do pious acts and establish Prayer and pay Zakat ( the Alms - due ) regularly have their reward with their Lord . And ( on the Last Day ) they will neither fear nor grieve .
O Believers ! Fear Allah and write off whatever balance remains of usury if you are believers ( true to the core of your hearts ) .
But if you do not do so , then stand red - alert on the declaration of war from Allah and His Holy Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) . And if you repent , then your principal amounts are ( lawfully ) yours . Do not wrong and be not wronged .
If a debtor is under financial stress , he should be given respite till he feels at ease to pay . And your forgoing ( the loan ) is better for you if you know ( what significance it has in the sight of Allah to console the poor ) .
And fear the Day when you will be returned to Allah . Then everyone will be paid in full for whatever he has done and they will not be wronged .
O Believers ! Whenever you strike deals with one another for a fixed period , reduce the transaction to writing .
And the scribe amongst you should write it with justice and should not refuse to write as Allah has taught him to write .
So he should write ( i . e . he should meet the requirements of documentation with utmost honesty , in accordance with the law of the land ) .
And he on whom the liability ( i . e . debt ) falls should dictate the contents of the contract .
And he should fear Allah , Who is his Sustainer , and ( while writing ) he should not diminish anything ( from the indebted sum ) .
Then if he who has undertaken the liability is mentally deficient or physically weak or lacks the ability to dictate the contents , his guardian should dictate with fairness .
And get two witnesses out of your own men . But if two men are not available then a man and two women : ( they ) should be from among those whom you like as witnesses ( i . e . consider trustworthy ) , so that if either of the two women forgets , the other may remind her .
And the witnesses should not refuse whenever they are called ( for evidence ) . And do not be weary of writing it down for its term whether the transaction is small or large .
This documentation by you is more just in the sight of Allah , and makes evidence more solid and nearer to keeping you from doubt , except that if transactions are hand - to - hand which you carry out among yourselves then there is no sin on you if you do not write it down .
And take witnesses whenever you bargain among yourselves .
And let no harm be done to either the scribe or the witness , but if you do so , it will be sheer disobedience on your part .
And keep fearing Allah . And Allah grants you knowledge of ( principles of mutual dealing ) and Allah knows everything well .
And if you are on a journey and do not find a scribe , then take possession of a pledge in mortgage . Then , if one of you trusts the other , so he whose honesty has been trusted should deliver his trust and fear Allah Who provides him subsistence . And do not conceal evidence . And the one who conceals it , his heart is certainly sinful . And Allah knows well whatever you do .
Whatever exists in the heavens and the earth belongs to Allah . Whether you reveal or conceal the secrets of your heart , Allah will call you to account for that . Then Allah shall forgive whom He desires and torment whom He desires . And Allah has Absolute Power over everything .
( He ) the Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) believed in ( i . e . affirmed ) what was revealed to him by his Lord and so did the believers . All embraced faith ( from the core of their hearts ) in Allah , His angels , His Books and His Messengers . ( They also say : ) We do not differentiate between any of His Messengers ( in believing ) . And they submit ( before His Holy Presence ) : We have heard ( Your Command ) and ( accepted to ) obey . O our Lord ! We seek Your forgiveness and to You ( we all ) have to return .
Allah does not put under stress any soul more than its endurance . There is a reward for whatever good it has earned and there is torment for whatever evil it has perpetrated . O our Lord , do not take us to task if we forget or do some mistake . O our Lord , lay not on us such a ( heavy ) burden as You laid on those before us . O our Lord , put not on us ( also ) the burden that we have not the strength to bear , and overlook ( our sins ) , and forgive us and have mercy on us . You alone are our Master and Helper . So grant us victory over the disbelievers .
Alif , Lam , Mim . ( Only Allah and the Messenger know the real meaning . )
Allah ! None is worthy of worship but He , the Ever - Living , Self - Subsisting and Sustainer ( of the entire universe with His Strategy ) .
( O Beloved ! ) He is the One Who has revealed to you ( this ) Book with Truth . ( It ) confirms ( all those Books ) that were revealed before it . And He is the One Who has revealed the Torah and the Injil ( the Gospel ) .
( As the Books were revealed ) before this to guide the people , He has ( now , in like manner , ) revealed ( the Quran , ) the Criterion to distinguish right from wrong . Verily those who deny Allahs Revelations for them is rigorous punishment . And Allah is Almighty , the Lord of Retribution .
Surely , nothing is hidden from Allah in the earth or in the heaven .
He is the One Who shapes your forms the way He desires in the wombs ( of mothers ) . None is worthy of worship but He . He is Almighty , All - Wise .
He is the One Who has revealed to you the Book comprising some firm and solid Verses ( i . e . literally clear and precise in meaning ) ; they are the foundation of ( commandments ) of the Book . And other Verses are figurative ( i . e . containing abstract and allusive meaning ) . So , those who have deviation in their hearts follow only its figurative Verses ( just ) under the urge to create disruption and with the motive to supply them self - seeking interpretation instead of their true interpretation . But none knows its true interpretation apart from Allah . And those who are perfectly firm in knowledge say : We believe in it . The whole ( Book ) has been revealed by our Lord . And direction and guidance is the share of only those who possess wisdom and insight .
( And they submit : ) O our Lord , let not our hearts deviate after You have honoured us with guidance and grant us Mercy especially from Your Presence . Truly You alone are the Great Bestower .
O Our Lord ! You will surely bring together mankind on the Day about which there is no doubt . Verily , Allah does not go against ( His ) promise .
Indeed those who reject faith , neither their wealth nor their children shall be able to save them anyway from ( the torment of ) Allah . It is they who are the fuel of Hell .
( Their ) line of action ( also ) resembles that of the people of Pharaoh and those before them who belied Our Revelations . So , Allah seized them because of their sins and Allah gives severe punishment .
Say to the disbelievers : You will soon be overpowered and driven towards Hell , and that is a very evil abode .
There is certainly a sign for you in the two parties that encountered each other ( in the battlefield of Badr ) one party fought in the cause of Allah and the other comprised the disbelievers . They saw them with their ( own ) eyes as twice their own number . And Allah provides strength with His reinforcement whom He likes . In this incident there is surely a ( notable ) lesson of warning for those who have eyes .
( Excessively ) attractive has been made , for the people , the love of lusts ( that ) include women , children , and hoarded treasures of gold and silver , and branded horses and cattle and crops . ( All ) this is the provision of the worldly life and with Allah is the best abode .
( O Beloved ! ) Say : Shall I give you the news of something far better than all this ? ( Yes , ) for the Godfearing there are ( such ) gardens with their Lord beneath which streams flow . They will live there forever . There will be ( for them ) chaste wives , and ( above all ) they shall enjoy the pleasure of Allah . And Allah monitors His servants well .
( These are the people ) who say : O our Lord , we have surely believed , so , forgive us our sins and save us from the torment of Hell .
( They are ) steadfast ( people ) , truthful in their words and deeds and submissive in devotion and obedience . And they spend in the way of Allah , and ( rise ) in the later hours of the night to implore Allahs pardon .
Allah bears witness that none is worthy of worship apart from Him ; and the angels and those who possess knowledge also bear testimony to it ( as well as the fact ) that He designs and executes every plan with justice . None is worthy of worship but He . He is Almighty , All - Wise .
Truly , Islam is the only Din ( Religion ) in Allahs sight . And the people of the Book disagreed , after knowledge had come to them , only on account of their mutual jealousy and contention . And he who denies Allahs revelations , then surely Allah hastens in calling to account .
( O Beloved ! ) If they , even then , have a row with you , say to them : I have bowed my humble face in absolute submissiveness before the Presence of Allah and so have done those who follow me . And say to the people of the Book as well as the illiterate ones : Do you also bow before Allah ( i . e . do you accept Islam ) ? Then if they embrace submission then they have truly achieved guidance . But if they turn away , your responsibility is only to deliver the command . And Allah is Watchful of His servants .
Certainly those who deny Revelations of Allah and kill the Prophets unjustly , and also kill those of the people who enjoin equity and justice , so announce to them the news of a grievous torment .
They are the ones whose works have become void both in this world and in the Hereafter . And they shall have no helpers .
Have you not seen those who were given a portion of ( the knowledge of ) the Book ? They are invited towards the Book of Allah , so that it ( the Book ) gives judgment ( on disputes ) among them . Then , a party of them turn away and it is they who deviate .
This ( courage to deviate ) is because they say : The Fire of Hell will not touch us except for a few numbered days . And the lies that they invent ( about Allah ) have deluded them with regard to their Din ( Religion ) .
So , what will be their plight when We shall assemble all of them together on the Day in ( the happening of ) which there is no doubt and everyone will be paid back in full for whatever ( deeds ) he has earned , and no injustice will be done to them .
( O My Beloved ! ) Submit ( like this ) : O Allah , Lord of Sovereignty ! You bestow sovereignty on whom You will and You take away sovereignty from whom You will . You confer honour on whom You will and You dishonour whom You will . All good is in Your Mighty Hand and surely You have Absolute Authority and Control over everything .
You make the night enter into the day and You make the day enter into the night and You bring the living out of the dead and You bring the dead out of the living and You bless ( with Your Bounties ) without measure whom You wish .
The Muslims should not make friends with disbelievers instead of Muslims . And whoever does so will have nothing of ( the alliance with ) Allah except that you seek protection ( from their mischief ) . And Allah warns you to fear ( the wrath ) of His Divine Essence and to Allah is the return .
Say : Whether you hide what is in your breasts or make it known , Allah knows it and He thoroughly knows what is in the heavens and what is in the earth . And Allah has Mighty Control over everything .
On the Day when every soul shall find present ( before him ) every good that he accomplished and every evil that he perpetrated , he will wish there were a great distance between him and that evil ( or that Day ) . Allah warns you to fear ( the wrath ) of His Divine Essence and Allah is Most Compassionate towards His servants .
( O Beloved ! ) Say : If you love Allah , follow me . Allah will then take you as ( His ) beloved and forgive your sins for you , and Allah is Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
Say : Obey Allah and the Messenger ( blessing and peace be upon him ) . But if they turn away then Allah does not like the disbelievers .
Verily , Allah chose Adam , and Nuh ( Noah ) , and the family of Ibrahim ( Abraham ) and the family of Imran ( in dignity ) above all the people of the world .
They are all one race , descendants of one another . And Allah is All - Hearing , All - Knowing .
And ( recall ) when the wife of Imran said : O my Lord , I vow purely to You what is in my womb , freeing him ( from other obligations ) . So , accept ( this offering ) from me . You are indeed All - Hearing , All - Knowing .
So when she delivered a baby girl , she submitted : Lord , I have given birth but to a female child . But Allah knew best what she had given birth to . ( She said : ) And the boy ( that I prayed for ) could never ( be ) like the girl ( that Allah has blessed me with ) ; and I have named her Maryam ( Mary , the worshipper ) ; and surely I commit her and her children to Your protection against ( the mischief of ) Satan , the outcast .
So , her Lord graciously accepted her ( Maryam [ Mary ] ) with excellent acceptance and brought her up immaculately and entrusted her guardianship to Zakariyya ( Zacharias ) . Every time Zakariyya ( Zacharias ) entered her chamber of worship he found with her ( novel and uncommon ) food items . He inquired : O Maryam , wherefrom have these things come for you ? She replied : This ( sustenance ) comes from Allah . Verily , Allah provides sustenance without measure to whom He desires .
At the same place Zakariyya ( Zacharias ) supplicated his Lord . He submitted : O my Lord , bless me , out of Your Grace , with a virtuous and pure offspring . Surely You alone hear the supplication .
While he was still standing in the chamber offering the Prayer ( or supplicating ) , the angels called out to him : Indeed , Allah gives you the good news of ( a son ) Yahya ( John ) , who shall confirm the Word from Allah ( i . e . Isa [ Jesus ] ) and he will be a leader , well - protected against ( temptation for ) women and a Prophet from among ( Our ) exceptionally pious servants .
( Zakariyya ) submitted : O my Lord , how shall I have a son when old age has already overtaken me and my wife is ( also ) barren ? He said : The same way as Allah does whatever He wills .
Zakariyya submitted : O my Lord , fix a sign for me . Allah said : The sign for you is that for three days you will not be able to communicate to the people except by gestures . And remember your Lord excessively and glorify Him persistently evening and morning .
And when the angels said : O Maryam ( Mary ) , surely Allah has chosen you and has blessed you with purity and has exalted you today over all the women of the world .
O Maryam ( Mary ) ! Obey your Lord consistently with utmost humbleness , prostrate yourself and bow down in worship along with those who bow down .
( O Beloved ! ) These are news of the Unseen which We reveal to you . But ( at that time ) you were not present with them when they were casting their pens ( by way of a draw to determine ) which of them should take care of Maryam ( Mary ) . Nor were you with them when they were disputing with one another .
When the angels said : O Maryam ( Mary ) , surely , Allah gives you glad tidings of a ( particular ) Word from Him named the Messiah , Isa son of Maryam ( Jesus son of Mary ) , who would be eminent and exalted ( both ) in this world and in the Hereafter and would be of those who are exceptionally intimate servants of Allah blessed with His nearness .
And he will talk to the people ( alike ) both in the cradle and in ripe years , and he will be one of the pious servants ( of Allah ) .
Maryam ( Mary ) submitted : O my Lord , how shall I have a son when no man has ever touched me ? He said : Just as Allah creates what He pleases . When He decides ( to do ) some work , He just gives it the Command Be , and it becomes .
And Allah will teach him the Book and the Wisdom , the Torah and the Injil ( [ the Gospel ] everything ) .
And he will be a Messenger to the Children of Israel , ( saying to them : ) I have undoubtedly brought to you a Sign from your Lord : I design for you from clay ( a figure ) like the shape of a bird ; then I breathe into it ; and at once it becomes a flying bird by Allahs Command . And I restore to health the born blind , and the lepers , and raise the dead to life by the Command of Allah . And I inform you of ( all ) what you have eaten and what you have hoarded in your houses . Truly , there is a Sign in it for you if you believe .
And I validate the ( Book ) Torah sent down before me , and that is because I may declare certain things lawful for you which were forbidden to you as unlawful . And I have come to you from your Lord with a Sign . So , fear Allah and obey me .
Verily , Allah is my Lord and your Lord too . So worship Him alone . This is the straight path .
Later , when Isa ( Jesus ) sensed their disbelief , he said : Who are my helpers in the way of Allah ? His sincere companions submitted : We are the helpers of ( Din [ the religion ] of ) Allah . We have believed in Allah and bear witness that we are surely Muslims .
O our Lord ! We have believed in the Book which You have sent down and we have become the followers of this Messenger . So register us among those who bear witness ( to the Truth ) .
Then , the disbelieving ( Jews ) conspired secretly ( to execute Isa [ Jesus ] ) but Allah covertly designed His plan ( to safeguard Isa [ Jesus ] ) . And Allah is the Best of secret planners .
When Allah said : O Isa ( Jesus ) , I will surely bring your term of life to completion ; and I am about to lift you towards Myself ( in the heavens ) , and deliver you from the disbelievers , and exalt your followers above ( these ) disbelievers till the Day of Resurrection . Then to Me you all have to return . So I shall judge between you in the matters about which you used to dispute .
As for those who disbelieved , I shall give them severe punishment ( both ) in this world and in the Hereafter , and they shall have no helpers .
And those who believed and did pious deeds , ( Allah ) shall reward them in full . And Allah does not like the wrongdoers .
These which We read out to you are Signs and the wisdom - laden advice .
Surely the example of Isa ( Jesus ) in the sight of Allah is the same as that of Adam whom He formed from clay , then said ( to him ) : Be . He became .
( Ordained to forewarn the Umma [ the Community ] : ) This is the Truth from your Lord , so be not of those who doubt .
So , if someone contends with you about Isa ( Jesus ) after knowledge has come to you , say : Come , let us ( jointly ) call our sons and your sons , our women and your women and ourselves and yourselves ( at the same place ) . Then we supplicate fervently ( i . e . most submissively ) and invoke the curse of Allah upon the liars .
Most certainly , this is the true narrative and there is none worthy of worship except Allah . And verily Allah it is Who is All - Mighty , All - Wise .
But if they turn away , then surely Allah knows the miscreants full well .
Say : O People of the Book , come to that matter which is common between us and you ( namely that ) : we shall worship none other than Allah , and we shall not associate any partner with Him . Nor shall anyone of us take one another as Lords apart from Allah . Then if they turn away , say : Bear witness that we are but Allahs obedient servants ( Muslims ) .
O People of the Book ! Why do you dispute about Ibrahim ( [ Abraham ] i . e . why do you regard him as a Jew or a Christian ] ) ? The truth is that the Torah and the Injil ( [ the Gospel ] on which both your religions are based ) were sent down after his time . Have you not even ( this much ) sense ?
Listen ! You are the people who have also been disputing about matters of which you had ( but some ) knowledge . But why do you dispute about things of which you have no knowledge ( at all ) ? And Allah knows but you do not know .
Ibrahim ( Abraham ) was neither a Jew nor a Christian ; he was a ( true ) Muslim , far detached from all heresy and falsehood . Nor was he one of the polytheists .
Certainly the nearest of the people to Ibrahim , ( and the most deserving ) are those who have followed him ( in his Din [ Religion ] ) . And ( they ) are no other than this Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) and those who have believed ( in him ) . And Allah is the Helper of the believers .
( O Muslims ! ) A section of the People of the Book ( intensely ) desire to , somehow , lead you astray but they have led astray only themselves while they have no sense ( of it ) .
O People of the Book ! Why are you denying Allahs Revelations while you bear witness yourselves ( i . e . you have read everything in your Books ) ?
O People of the Book ! Why do you confound the Truth with falsehood and why do you hide the Truth whereas you know ?
And a section of the People of the Book say ( to the people ) : Believe in the Book ( Quran ) which is sent down to Muslims at dawn ( in the morning ) and deny it in the evening , so that , ( imitating you , ) they may also desert and turn about .
And do not believe anyone but him who follows ( only ) your Din ( Religion ) . Say : Surely , the guidance is but the guidance of Allah ( alone ) . ( And they further say to their people never to believe even this ) that : The like of the Book ( or Din ) given to you may also be given to anyone else or that someone may give a plea against you before your Lord . Say : Bounty is in the Hand of Allah . He bestows on whom He pleases and Allah is All - Embracing , All - Knowing .
He specifies to His Mercy whom He desires and Allah is the Lord of Infinite Bounty .
And among the People of the Book there are a type that if you trust him with a heap of wealth , he will return it to you . And some among them are such that if you trust him with one dinar ( a gold coin ) , he will not return it to you unless you keep standing over him . That is because they say : There is no blame on us in the matter of the illiterate . And they fabricate a lie against Allah and they know it themselves ( as well ) .
Yes , he who fulfils his promise and adopts God - fearingness ( will indeed face no accountability ) ; so Allah surely loves the pious .
Certainly those who sell the promise of Allah and their own oaths for a small price , it is they who will not have any share in the Hereafter . And on the Day of Resurrection Allah will neither speak to nor look at them and nor will He purify them , and for them will be painful punishment .
And there is indeed another section of them who , while reciting the Book , twist their tongues so that you may take their inverted expressions as ( part of ) the Book whereas it is not from the Book . And they say : It is ( all ) from Allah , while it is not ( at all ) from Allah . They invent a lie against Allah and they know ( it ) themselves as well .
No human being whom Allah blesses with the Book and Wisdom and Prophethood has the right to say to the people : Be my servants instead of Allahs . ( He would rather say : ) Be the devotees of Allah because you teach the Book and because you study it yourselves as well .
And nor would that Messenger ever command you to take the angels and the Prophets as Lords . Would he command you ( now ) to disbelieve after you have become Muslims ?
And , ( O Beloved , recall the time ) when Allah took a firm covenant from the Prophets : When I give you the Book and Wisdom and then there comes to you the Messenger ( who is exalted in glory above all and ) who shall validate the Books you will have with you , you shall then , most certainly , believe in him and most surely help him . Allah said : Do you affirm , and on this ( condition ) hold fast to My heavy Covenant ? All submitted : We affirm . Allah said : Bear witness then and I am also with you among the witnesses .
( Now admonished all mankind : ) Then he who turns away after this ( affirmation ) , it is they who will be the disobedient .
Do they seek some Din ( Religion ) other than Allahs ? And whoever is in the heavens and the earth has embraced His obedience ( whether ) by choice or by constraint , and to Him shall they all be returned .
Say : We believe in Allah and in that which has been sent down to us and in that which has been revealed to Ibrahim ( Abraham ) , Ismail ( Ishmael ) , Ishaq ( Isaac ) and Yaqub ( Jacob ) and their descendants and that which has been given to Musa ( Moses ) , Isa ( Jesus ) and all other Messengers by their Lord ( we believe in all ) . We do not make distinction in our faith in anyone of them and to Him we submit ourselves .
And whoever seeks a Din ( Religion ) other than Islam that shall not at all be accepted from him , and he will be among the losers in the Hereafter .
How shall Allah guide those who disbelieved after embracing faith while they had borne witness that this Messenger is true , and clear Signs too had come to them ? And Allah does not guide the wrongdoers .
The punishment of such people is that they are continually plagued by the curse of Allah , of the angels and of all mankind .
They shall remain ( imprisoned ) under this curse forever . And neither will this torment be lessened nor shall they be given respite .
Except those who repent and mend ( their ) ways . Allah is , indeed , Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
Assuredly , the people who disbelieve after accepting belief and then advance in disbelief , their repentance will not be accepted at all , and it is they who have lost the right path .
Surely those who disbelieved and died while they were disbelievers , if anyone of them offers an earthful of gold as ransom ( for his salvation ) that shall not at all be accepted from him . It is they for whom there is painful torment . And no helper will be possible for them .
You can never attain to piety unless you spend ( in the cause of Allah ) out of that which you like the most ; and Allah surely knows well whatever you give away .
Before the revelation of the Torah , everything edible was lawful for the Children of Israel except those ( things ) which Yaqub ( Jacob ) had declared forbidden for himself . Say : Bring the Torah and read it out if you are truthful .
So , whoever fabricates a lie against Allah even after this , then it is they who are the wrongdoers .
Say : Allah has proclaimed the Truth , so follow the Din ( Religion ) of Ibrahim ( Abraham ) who , rejecting every evil , devoted himself wholly to Allah . And he was not one of the polytheists .
The first House ever constructed for mankind ( to worship ) is indeed the one in Makka teeming with blessings and ( the centre of ) guidance for the whole world .
There are manifest Signs in it , ( one of which is ) the station of Ibrahim ( Abraham ) . Whoever enters it attains safety and protection ; and the Pilgrimage to this House is prescribed for the people for the sake of Allah whoever may afford its journey ; and whoever denies ( it ) then indeed , Allah is Self - Sufficient , Beyond Need of all the worlds .
Say : O People of the Book , why do you deny the Revelations of Allah ? And Allah is observing your actions .
Say : O People of the Book , why do you hinder him from Allahs path who has embraced faith ? You want to make their path crooked too while you are yourselves a witness ( that it is straight ) . And Allah is not unaware of your doings .
O Believers ! If you obey any section of the People of the Book , they will turn you back to disbelief after you have ( embraced ) faith .
And how will you disbelieve ( now ) while you are ( fortunate ) ones to whom the Verses of Allah are recited , and the Messenger of Allah ( blessings and peace be upon him ) is ( himself ) present among you ? And whoever holds fast to ( the Embrace of ) Allah is most surely guided to the straight path .
O Believers ! Fear Allah as it is due to fear Him . And death should approach you only in a state when you are Muslim .
And hold fast to the rope of Allah all of you together and do not generate dissension and factions . But call to mind the blessing of Allah upon you when you were enemies ( one to another ) . Then He created the bond of love among your hearts , and by His blessing you became brothers . And you ( had reached ) the brink of a pit of Fire ( of Hell ) but He rescued you from it . That is how Allah elaborates His Signs to you so that you may take guidance to the right path .
And from amongst you there must be a community comprising the people who would invite mankind towards piety , bid righteousness and forbid evil . And they are the successful people .
And become not like those who split into sects and dissented even after manifest Signs had reached them . And it is they who would suffer grievous torment .
On the Day when many faces will be bright and many others will be dark . The ones with dark faces ( will be asked ) : Did you reject faith after you had believed ? So taste the torment for the disbelief you had been committing .
But those with ( glittering ) white faces will be in Allahs Mercy . Therein will they live forever .
These are the Revelations of Allah which We recite to you with Truth . And Allah intends no injustice to mankind .
And whatever exists in the heavens and the earth belongs to Allah alone . And to Allah will all matters be returned .
You are the best community brought forth for ( the guidance of ) mankind : you command righteousness , forbid evil and believe in Allah . Had the People of the Book also embraced faith that would certainly have been in their favour . There are some among them who believe , while the majority of them are disobedient .
They cannot do you any harm beyond offending ; and if they fight you they will turn their backs upon you ; then they will not be helped ( as well ) .
They are shut in humiliation wherever they may be found , except that they are ( provided with shelter ) under some promise with Allah or some bond with people . And they have earned Allahs wrath , and have been subjected to indigence consequent on their rejection of Allahs Revelations and killing the Prophets unjustly , because they turned into rebels and exceeded all limits ( in rebelliousness and defiance ) .
They are not all alike . Some of the People of the Book are ( also ) firmly committed to the Truth . They recite the Verses of Allah during the hours of night and remain in the state of prostration before their Lord .
They believe in Allah and the Last Day and command righteousness , and forbid evil , and advance fast in righteous works . And it is they who are among the pious .
And whatever pious acts they do will not be disregarded ; and Allah is well aware of those who guard against evil .
Certainly those who have disbelieved , neither their riches nor their children will provide them any protection against ( the torment of ) Allah . And they are the ones who are the inmates of Hell and will live there forever .
( Whatever ) wealth ( these people ) spend in the life of this world is like the frost - laden wind which strikes and destroys the harvest of a people who wrong their own souls . And Allah has not done them any wrong but they themselves manage their own wreck .
O Believers ! Do not confide in those who are not from amongst you . They will never miss ( any ) chance to cause you mischief . They wish you severe torture . As for their malice , that has become evident from their utterances , and ( the hostility ) that they have concealed in their hearts is ( even ) greater . We have made the Signs manifest to you , if you would use your intellect .
Beware ! You are the ones who love them but they do not ( even ) like you although you believe in all the Books . When they meet you , they say : We have accepted faith , but when alone , they bite their fingers in rage against you . Say : Perish in your pent - up rage . Certainly Allah knows well the secrets of hearts .
If something goes in your favour , it grieves them ; but if some pain afflicts you , that pleases them . However , if you keep patience and guard yourselves against evil persistently , their deceitfulness would do you no harm . And Allah indeed has encompassed all that they are doing .
And ( recall the time ) when early morning you left your blessed abode ( on the eve of the battle of Uhud ) and were positioning the Muslims at their posts for the battle . And Allah is All - Hearing , All - Knowing .
When two groups from amongst you ( Banu Salma Khazraj and Banu Haritha Aws ) intended to go coward although Allah was their Ally . And the believers must have trust in Allah alone .
And Allah provided you help in the battle of Badr , whereas you had little resources ( at that time ) . Therefore , fear Allah so that you may become grateful .
When you were saying to the believers : Is it not enough for you that your Lord should reinforce you with three thousand sent - down angels ?
Yes , if you remain steadfast and persist in God - wariness and these ( unbelievers ) suddenly launch the blitz against you with ( full ) force , then your Lord would come to your aid with distinctly marked five thousand angels .
And Allah has made this ( reinforcement ) just a glad tidings for you so that it may content your hearts . And support comes only from Allah Who is Almighty , Most Wise .
( Also ) because ( Allah ) may exterminate a section of the unbelievers or abase them so that they go back defeated .
( O Beloved ! Now ) this matter is not your concern whether Allah enables them to repent or torments them , because they are the transgressors .
Whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth belongs to Allah alone . He forgives whom He wills and He punishes whom He wills and Allah is Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
O Believers ! Do not live on usury doubled and redoubled and keep fearing Allah so that you may prosper .
And fear that Fire which has been prepared for those who reject faith .
And persist in obedience to Allah and the Messenger ( blessing and peace be upon him ) so that you may be blessed with Mercy .
And advance fast towards forgiveness from your Lord and Paradise whose vastness encompasses the heavens and the earth ( and ) which has been prepared for the pious .
They are the ones who spend in the cause of Allah whether they are affluent or indigent ( in both the conditions ) , sublimate their anger and tolerate ( the faults of the ) people ; and Allah loves those who are benevolent .
And ( they ) are such people that if they commit some immoral act or wrong themselves , they remember Allah , then seek forgiveness for their sins . And who forgives sins except Allah ? And they do not deliberately persist in the sinful acts which they committed .
It is they whose reward is forgiveness from their Lord and Gardens beneath which rivers flow . They will reside therein permanently . What an excellent reward there is for those who execute righteous acts !
Before you many codes ( of Divine Law ) have passed ( for the preceding nations ) . So travel in the earth and observe what was the end of those who belied !
This Quran is an exposition for mankind and guidance and counsel for those who fear Allah .
And do not lose heart nor feel grieved ; and it is you who will be victorious , provided you maintain ( perfect ) faith .
If you have received a blow ( now , then remember that ) they too have received a similar blow already . These are the days which We rotate among people . And these ( ups and downs ) occur so that Allah may distinguish the identity of true believers and bestow upon some of you the status of martyr . And Allah does not like the wrongdoers .
And this is ( also ) with the intention that Allah may bring ( more ) refinement to the believers ( i . e . cleanse and purify them ) and annihilate the disbelievers .
Do you assume that you will enter Paradise ( without any good ) whereas Allah has not yet tested those of you who combat for His cause , nor has He judged the steadfast ?
And you used to long for death ( of a martyr ) before you faced it . So now you have seen it in front of your own eyes .
And Muhammad ( [ too ] Allah bless him and give him peace ) is but only a Messenger ( and not God ) . Many a Messenger has passed away ( from this world ) before him as well ( bearing adversities and turmoils ) . So , if he passes away or is martyred , will you then turn on your heels ( back to your former religion i . e . will you consider his death or martyrdom - God forbid - based on either falsehood of Din [ religion ] of Islam or his untrue Messengership ) ? And whoever turns back on his heels shall not harm Allah the least . And Allah will soon reward those who give thanks ( by remaining steadfast in hardship ) .
And no one can die without Allahs Command . ( His ) term has been fixed in writing . And whoever desires the reward of this world , We give him of that ; and whoever longs for the reward of the Hereafter , We give him of that ; and soon shall We pay reward ( affluently ) to those who pay thanks .
And how many a Prophet has there been who fought in the cause of Allah ! A large number of devotees of Allah ( Awliya ) also joined them . They did not lose heart due to hardships which afflicted them in the way of Allah . They neither showed weakness nor gave in . And Allah loves those who remain steadfast .
And they said nothing except this supplication : O our Lord , forgive our sins and overlook the excesses that we committed in our work , and keep us firm - footed ( on Your path ) and bestow upon us victory over the disbelievers .
So , Allah paid them the reward of this world and also an excellent recompense in the Hereafter . And Allah loves ( those ) righteous people ( who are in love with Him alone ) .
O Believers ! If you obey the disbelievers , they will turn you back on your heels ( to disbelief ) . You will then turn back as losers .
Nay , Allah is your Maula ( Helper and Guardian ) and He is the best of helpers .
Soon shall We plant ( your ) awe into the hearts of disbelievers because they have associated that partner with Allah for which He has not sent down any authority . And Hell is their abode and extremely horrible is ( that ) abode of the wrongdoers .
Surely , Allah fulfilled His promise to you when you were killing them by His command until you showed cowardice and you started disputing about the command ( of the Messenger , [ blessings and peace be upon him ] ) and later disobeyed ( him ) whereas Allah had brought that victory in your sight which you coveted . Among you were some who desired gains of this world and some others who sought reward in the Hereafter . Then He turned you back from them ( dominated ) so that He tests you . ( Later , however , ) He pardoned you and Allah is Most Gracious to the believers .
When you were running away ( in panic ) and did not look back at anyone and the Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) was calling you out ( standing ) among the party that were ( steadfast ) in your rear . Then He inflicted upon you sorrows one after the other ( for admonition and training ) so that you might not grieve over what you had lost and the calamity that had befallen you . And Allah is Aware of your works .
Then after grief He sent down on you calm ( and peace for relief ) in the form of a slumber that overtook a party of you , while another party ( comprising hypocrites that ) was worried only about their own souls indulged in false assumptions about Allah which were ( just ) the assumptions of ignorance . They say : Do we too have anything ( i . e . authority ) in this matter ? Say : The whole matter is in the Hand of Allah . They have concealed in their hearts things which they let not be disclosed to you . They say : Had we any say in this matter we would not have been slain here . Say : Had you been ( even ) in your homes , those for whom killing was decreed would have come over to their slaughter places . And that has been ( done ) so that Allah may test what is in your breasts and purge exhaustively the ( apprehensions ) pent up in your hearts . And Allah has thorough knowledge of the secrets of breasts .
Certainly , those of you who fled on that day when the two armies engaged in fierce fighting were only caused by Satan to slip , owing to some act they had perpetrated . Allah pardoned them indeed . He is , of course , Most Forgiving , Most Forbearing .
O Believers ! Be not like the infidels who say of those of their brothers who go ( somewhere ) on a journey or go to fight ( and die there ) : Had they stayed with us they would neither have died nor been slain , so that Allah may make this ( assumption ) a regret in their hearts . It is Allah Who keeps alive and causes death . And Allah keeps a strict eye on what you do .
And if you get slain in the cause of Allah or die , Allahs Forgiveness and Mercy is far better than that ( wealth ) which you accumulate .
And if you die or be slain , you ( all ) will be brought together before Allah .
( O My Adorable Beloved ! ) What a Mercy of Allah that you are lenient with them ! Had you been stern and hard - hearted , people would have deserted , scattering away from around you . So pardon them , and pray for their forgiveness , and consult them in ( important ) matters . But once you make up your mind , then place your trust in Allah . Surely Allah loves those who trust Him .
If Allah helps you , none can overpower you ; but if He abandons you taking away all support , then who is it that can help you after Him ? And the believers should rely on Allah alone .
It is just not conceivable about any Prophet that he would conceal anything . And whoever hides away ( anothers right ) will have to bring forth on the Day of Resurrection whatever he had held back . Then everyone will be paid in full for his deeds , and they will not be wronged .
How can a person who has subjected himself to the will of Allah be like the one who has earned Allahs wrath ? And Hell is his abode and that is an extremely evil dwelling .
They have varying grades in the sight of Allah and Allah thoroughly observes their acts .
Indeed Allah conferred a great favour on the believers that He raised among them ( the most eminent ) Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) from among themselves who recites to them His Revelations , purifies them and educates them on the Book and Wisdom though , before that , they were in manifest error .
Is it not that when disaster seized you , while you had inflicted twice as much ( on your enemy ) , you said : Whence has it befallen ? Say : It is from your own selves . Indeed , Allah has Absolute Control over everything .
And the agony that hurt you on the day when the two armies clashed with each other came about ( only ) by Allahs Command . And ( this happened ) so that Allah establishes the identity of the believers .
And ( He ) also distinguishes the identity of those who are hypocrites . And when it was said to them : Come and fight in the cause of Allah or defend ( against the enemy invasion ) , they said : If we knew that there would be a war ( actually of some kind or had we considered it a war in the cause of Allah ) we would certainly follow you . That day they were closer to an evident disbelief as compared to ( the pretended ) belief . They utter that from their mouths which is not in their hearts . And Allah knows well ( the matters ) which they hide .
( They ) are the ones who said about their brothers while they themselves stayed back ( home ) : Had they accepted our counsel , they would not have been slain . Say : Protect yourselves from death if you are truthful .
And do not ( ever ) think that those who are slain in the way of Allah are dead . They are rather alive in the Presence of their Lord . They are served with sustenance ( comprising bounties of Paradise ) .
They rejoice in these ( blessings of eternal life ) which Allah has conferred on them of His Bounty and also feel pleased ( on finding ) their successors ( on the path of faith and obedience ) , who have not ( yet ) joined them , for they shall also have neither any fear nor any grief .
They are filled with joy owing to the blessing ( of divine disclosures of the nearness ) of Allah and His Bounty ( of pleasures of Union with Him ) and ( also ) because Allah does not waste the reward of the believers .
Those who submitted to the Command of Allah and His Messenger even after sustaining injuries for those of them who possess spiritual excellence and are God - fearing , there is immense reward .
They are the ones whom people said : The adversaries have gathered ( in great number ) against you , so fear them . But this ( information ) further enhanced their faith and they proclaimed : Allah is Sufficient for us and what an excellent Guardian He is !
Then they ( the Muslims ) returned with the bounties and blessings of Allah , untouched by any suffering . They followed the will of Allah , and Allah is the Lord of Great Bounty .
Surely this ( informer ) is Satan alone who threatens ( you ) through his friends . Therefore , do not fear them and fear Me alone if you are the believers .
( O Sympathizer of the whole mankind ! ) Those who hasten in ( reinforcing ) disbelief should not aggrieve you . They cannot do any damage to ( the Din [ Religion ] of ) Allah and Allah intends that there is no share for them in the Hereafter . And for them there is severe torment .
Indeed those who buy disbelief at the cost of belief cannot harm Allah the least , and for them there is grievous torment .
And the disbelievers must never assume that the respite We are providing them is of any good for their souls . We are granting them ( this ) respite for the reason that they may grow further in sins . And ( ultimately ) there is for them a humiliating torment .
And Allah will never leave the Muslims in the status quo you are caught in ( now ) until He distinguishes the impure from the pure . And it is not Allahs Glory that , ( O common people , ) he reveals to you the Unseen . However , Allah chooses from among His Messengers whom He wills ( for the knowledge of the unseen ) . Therefore , put faith in Allah and His Messengers . And if you embrace faith and become God - fearing , there is a tremendous reward for you .
And those who are niggardly in giving away ( from the wealth ) which Allah has bestowed upon them out of His bounty must never consider this miserliness of any benefit for themselves ; it is rather injurious to them . Soon on the Day of Resurrection this wealth , which they are niggardly about , will be put around ( their necks ) like a neck - fetter . To Allah belongs the heritage of the heavens and the earth ( i . e . He will remain the Owner of the universe after your death in the same way as He owns it today ) . And Allah is Well Aware of all your deeds .
Allah has , surely , heard the remarks of those who say : Allah is indigent and we are rich . We shall keep a written record of all that they say and their unjust killing of Messengers ( as well ) . And ( on the Day of Resurrection ) We shall say : ( Now you ) taste the incinerating torment .
This is the recompense of your deeds that your hands have forwarded ahead and Allah , indeed , does not do injustice to servants .
The people ( Jews ) who say ( as a justification ) : Allah sent to us the Command not to put faith in any Messenger unless he brings us an offering ( to prove his Messengership ) whom fire will ( break out to ) devour . Say ( to them ) : Certainly many Messengers with evident Signs preceded me and also ( came ) with the Sign which you speak of . Then ( despite that ) why did you martyr them if you are ( so ) truthful ?
If , even then , they belie you , ( My Beloved , do not be aggrieved ) . So many Messengers were belied before you who brought clear Signs ( miracles ) , Scriptures and the Enlightening Book .
Every soul is going to taste death . And your full recompense shall be paid back only on the Day of Resurrection . So , whoever will be saved from Hell and admitted to Paradise will be truly successful . And the worldly life is nothing but illusory wealth .
( O Believers ! ) You shall most certainly be tested in your possessions and your selves . And of course you shall have also to hear many torturing ( taunts ) from those who were given the Book before you and who are polytheists . But if you remain patient and stick to self - protection , that is one of the works demanding high resolve .
And when Allah took a firm promise from those who were given the Book : You shall communicate it clearly and plainly to the people and shall not hide ( whatever is described in it ) , they cast this promise behind their backs and sold it for a paltry price . This is an extremely evil transaction on their part .
Never regard those ( as the emancipated ones ) who rejoice over their crooked works and want to be praised for the deeds that they have never done . ( Proclaimed for emphasis : ) never think that they are delivered from punishment ; and for them is an awful torment .
The Sovereignty of all the heavens and the earth belongs to Allah alone and Allah has Perfect Control over everything . ( So focus your attention on and trust in Him alone . )
Indeed in the creation of the heavens and the earth and the alternation of the night and the day there are Signs ( of Allahs Absolute Authority ) for those who possess constructive wisdom .
These are the people who , remembering Allah , remain standing ( as the epitome of submissiveness ) , sitting ( as reverence incarnate ) and ( also keep ) changing sides ( in discomfort of love ) and meditate on ( manifest lustre of His Eminence and Beauty at work in ) the creation of the heavens and the earth . ( Then acquainted with the pleasure of His gnosis , they call out spontaneously : ) O our Lord , You have not created ( all ) this without any rationale and strategy . You are impeccably Pure ( of all shortcomings and obligations ) . So protect us from the torment of Hell .
O our Lord ! Indeed whomever You admit to Hell , You have surely humiliated him and the wrongdoers do not have any supporters .
O our Lord ! ( We were oblivious of You , ) then we heard a Caller , calling towards faith : ( O people , ) believe in your Lord . So we embraced faith . O our Lord , now forgive our sins and erase our blunders ( from the record of our works ) and make us die in the company of the pious .
O our Lord ! Grant us all that You have promised us through Your Messengers and do not humiliate us on the Day of Resurrection . Surely , You do not go against Your promise .
Then their Lord accorded approval to their supplication ( and said : ) Certainly I do not waste wages of any labourer whether man or woman ; you all are from one another . So those who have emigrated ( for the cause of Allah ) and have been driven out of their dwellings ( for Him alone ) and have been offended in My way , and fought for My sake and were slain , I shall verily erase their sins from their record of works and admit them to the Gardens beneath which rivers flow . This is the reward from Allah and ( even ) better reward ( than this ) lies with Allah alone .
( O servant of Allah ! ) The roaming about of the disbelievers in the cities ( with luxurious riches ) should not cause you any illusion .
This is an insignificant possession ( for a brief period ) . Then their abode will be Hell and that is a very evil abode .
But those who persist in fearing their Lord , for them there are Gardens beneath which rivers flow . There will they reside forever . This is hospitaility ( for them ) from Allah . And ( His chamber of Proximity , lustre of His Beauty and the Blessing of Union with Him , in sum , ) whatever there is with Allah is excellent for the pious .
And indeed some People of the Book are such that they believe in Allah and also ( have faith in ) the Book that has been revealed to you and the one which was sent down to them . Their hearts remain subdued before Allah . And they do not receive paltry price for the Revelations of Allah . They are the ones whose reward lies with their Lord . Indeed Allah is Swift at reckoning .
O Believers ! Be steadfast and in perseverance ( and tenacity ) toil ( even harder than the enemy ) and be alert and vigilant ( for struggle against violation of peace and human rights ) , and ( always ) persist in fearing Allah so that you may achieve success .
O Mankind ! Fear your Lord Who ( initiated ) your creation from a single soul , then from it created its mate , and from these two spread ( the creation of ) countless men and women . So , fear Allah for Whose sake you solicit needs from one another . And ( become God - fearing ) towards your own kith and kin ( as well ) . Allah is indeed Ever - Watchful over you .
And deliver to the orphans their belongings ; and do not exchange the bad for the good ; nor consume their wealth by mixing it with your own . Indeed this is a great sin .
And if you have the apprehension that you will not be able to treat the orphan girls justly then marry the women you like and who are lawful for you , two or three or four ( but this sanction is conditional on justice ) . Then if you fear that you will not be able to treat ( more than one wife ) justly then ( marry ) only one woman or the maids who have come under your possession ( in accordance with the Islamic law ) . This makes it more likely that you restrain you from committing injustice .
And pay the women their dower with a pleased heart . Then if they forgo for you some ( of the dower ) out of their own pleasure , you may consume it as pleasant and favourable ( for you ) .
And do not entrust to the mentally deficient your ( or their ) assets which Allah has made a means of stability for your economy . However , feed them out of it and clothe them , and say to them good and nice words .
And evaluate and test the orphans ( for the sake of their training ) till they attain to ( the age of ) marriage . Then if you discern in them ingenuity ( and the knack of planning ) , hand over their assets to them . And devour not their wealth spending it wastefully and in haste ( fearing that after ) they grow mature ( they will take it back ) . The one who is affluent must absolutely abstain ( from the orphans property ) but he who is indigent ( himself ) should consume but a fair portion of it ( only ) . And when you return to them their assets , take witnesses over them . And Sufficient is Allah at reckoning .
Men have a share in ( the assets ) that their parents and nearest kin leave behind and women ( also ) have a share in the inheritance of their parents and the nearest kin . Be it small or large , the share has been fixed ( by Allah ) .
If the relatives ( other than heirs ) and the orphans and the indigent are present on the occasion of division ( of inheritance ) , give them also something out of it and say to them good and nice words .
And the people ( who execute matters of orphans ) should fear that ( while dying ) if they were to leave tender offspring behind , ( how ) frightened ( and worried ) would they be over the plight of their children ! They should , therefore , keep fearing Allah ( in the matter of orphans ) and should say the things straight .
Indeed those who eat up the property of orphans unjustly fill their bellies but with fire , and soon will they fall into a Blazing Fire .
Allah commands you concerning ( inheritance of ) your children : The share of a son is equal to that of two daughters ; then if there are only daughters ( two or ) more , they are entitled to two - thirds of the inheritance ; if there is only one daughter , her share will be one half ; the mother and the father of the deceased will get one - sixth of the inheritance each , if the deceased leaves children behind ; but in case the deceased has no children and the heirs are only his mother and his father , the mothers share is one - third ( and the rest is the fathers ) ; then , if he has brothers and sisters , the mother will have a sixth portion . This distribution will be ( executed ) after ( the fulfilment of ) the will he may have made or after ( the payment of ) the debt . You know not which of them , whether your parents or your sons , are closer to you in bringing you benefit . This ( distribution ) is a duty assigned ( i . e . fixed ) by Allah . Surely , Allah is All - Knowing , Most Wise .
And for you , the share in the property your wives leave is one half , provided they have no children . In case they have offspring then for you there is one - fourth of inheritance , ( that too ) after ( the fulfilment of ) the will that may have been made or after ( the payment of ) debt . And the share of your wives in the assets you leave is one - forth , provided you have no children . But if you have children then their share in your inheritance is one - eighth , after ( the fulfilment of ) the will made pertaining to ( the inheritance ) or the payment of ( your ) debt . In the case of a man or a woman who leaves neither parents nor children , but who has a brother or a sister ( on the mothers side i . e . a uterine brother or a sister ) , there is a one - sixth share for each of the two . But if they are more than that , they all will be sharers in one - third . ( This division shall also be accomplished ) after the will which is made without any prejudice towards the heirs or after the ( payment ) of debt . This is a Command from Allah and Allah is All - Knowing , Most Forbearing .
These are the limits set by Allah . And the one who obeys Allah and His Messenger ( blessing and peace be upon him ) , He ( Allah ) will admit him to the Gardens beneath which rivers flow . They shall reside therein forever , and this is a great achievement .
But whoever disobeys Allah and His Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) and exceeds His limits , He will admit him to Hell wherein shall he live forever ; and there is a humiliating torment for him .
And those of your women who commit adultery , call in from your men four witnesses against them . Then if they produce evidence , confine those women to their houses till death completes their term of life or Allah ordains a way ( i . e . a new injunction ) for them .
And the two persons from among you who commit adultery , afflict them both . Then , if they repent and mend ( their ) ways , refrain from punishing them . Indeed Allah is Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
Allah has promised to accept the repentance of only those who commit evil deeds due to ignorance , then repent soon after . So Allah will return to such people with His Mercy and Allah is All - Knowing , Most Wise .
But repentance is not ( accepted ) of the people who persist in sinful acts until death overtakes one of them , ( then ) he says : Now I repent . Nor is repentance ( of any avail ) for those who die as disbelievers . We have prepared grievous torment for them .
O Believers ! It is not lawful for you to become heirs to women by force . And do not hold them back in order to take ( back ) from them a portion of that which you gave them , unless they commit open indecency . And treat them honourably . Then if you dislike them , it may be that you dislike a thing and Allah places in it abundant good .
And if you seek to take a wife in place of another and you have ( by now ) given to her heaps of wealth , yet do not take back any part of it . Do you want to take that wealth ( back ) by means of unjust accusation and manifest sin ?
And how can you take it back while you have had marital relations with each other and they have ( also ) taken a firm promise from you ?
And do not marry women whom your fathers and forefathers married . But that which has passed ( before this command is forgiven ) . It is indeed highly indecent , infuriating and an evil custom .
Forbidden to you are your mothers , your daughters , your sisters , your fathers sisters and your mothers sisters and your brothers daughters and sisters daughters and your mothers ( who ) have suckled you , your foster sisters and mothers of your wives . And ( similarly ) your stepdaughters brought up under your parentage born of your women with whom you have had marital relations ( are also forbidden to you . ) If you have not had martial relations , then there is no harm ( in marrying their daughters ) . Forbidden are also wives of your real sons who are of your loins and having ( in marriage ) two sisters together , except that which has passed in the days of ignorance . Allah indeed is Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
And ( forbidden to you are also ) women having husbands except those ( prisoners of war ) who come into your legal possession . Allah has prescribed for you ( these Commands of forbiddance ) . And ( all women ) other than these are made lawful for you , so that you may wish them for marriage by means of your money ( dower ) , maintaining chastity and not in pursuit of satisfying lust . Then those of them from whom you have received benefit in exchange for that ( money ) , pay them their fixed dowers . And there is no sin on you pertaining to the money on which you mutually agree after fixing the dower . Surely Allah is All - Knowing , Most Wise .
And whoever of you cannot afford to marry free believing women may marry those believing slave girls who are in your possession ( under Islamic Law ) . And Allah knows best ( the state of ) your belief . You ( all ) are one from another . So , marry these ( slave girls ) with the permission of their masters , and pay them their dowers according to custom , provided they are wedlocked ( being chaste ) , neither committing illegal sex nor taking secret lovers . If they commit fornication after they have entered into wedlock , their punishment will be the half of that ( appointed ) for free ( unmarried ) women . This permission is for him among you who fears ( indulging in ) sin and if you practise self - restraint that is better for you . And Allah is Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
Allah intends to explain to you ( His Commands ) and guide you to the ways of those ( pious ) people who have passed before you and return to you in Mercy . And Allah is All - Knowing , Most Wise .
And Allah intends to bestow upon you His Favour , but those who pursue the lusts ( of the ill - commanding selves ) wish you to turn far away from the right path .
Allah intends to lighten your burden . And man has been created weak ( and infirm ) .
O Believers ! Do not devour one anothers wealth unlawfully among yourselves unless it is a trade by your mutual agreement and do not kill yourselves . Surely , Allah is Kind to you .
But whoever will do that through transgression and injustice , We shall soon throw him into the Fire ( of Hell ) and that is very easy for Allah .
If you keep abstaining from major sins that you are forbidden to do We shall remove from you your minor sins and shall admit you to a place of honour .
And do not long for the thing in which Allah has made some of you superior to others . Men will have a share of what they earn , and women will have a share of what they earn , and keep begging Allah for His Bounty . Surely Allah knows best everything .
And We have appointed to everyone legatees ( heirs ) of the property left by parents and near relations . And to those with whom you have made an agreement , give them their share . Assuredly , Allah observes everything .
Men are guardians and managers over women , because Allah has made one superior to the other and ( also ) because men spend their wealth ( on them ) . So the pious wives are obedient . They guard ( their chastity ) in the absence of their husbands with the protection of Allah . But those women whom you fear would disobey and defy , admonish them ; and ( if they do not amend , ) separate them ( from yourselves ) in beds ; and ( if they still do not improve , ) beat them ( softly to bring reform ) . Then if they become obedient to you , do not seek any way ( to oppress ) them . Surely , Allah is Most High , Most Great .
And if you fear a breach between the two then appoint one arbitrator from the husbands family and the other from the wifes family . If both ( the arbitrators ) resolve to bring about settlement , Allah will create harmony between them . Indeed , Allah is All - Knowing , All - Aware .
And worship Allah and do not set up any partners with Him . And treat the parents with moral excellence and ( do good to ) relatives , orphans , the needy , close as well as unacquainted neighbours , and your fellows and the wayfarers and those whom you possess . Surely Allah does not like the one who is arrogant ( self - conceited ) and boastful ( egoist ) .
Those who are miserly and bid others ( also ) to be miserly , and hide that ( blessing ) which Allah has granted them of His Bounty . And We have prepared a disgraceful torment for the disbelievers .
And those who spend their wealth to show off to people , and believe neither in Allah nor in the Last Day . And whoever Satan sides with as a companion , so he is an evil companion !
And what loss would they have suffered if they had believed in Allah and the Last Day , and spent ( in His way ) of what Allah had given them ? And Allah is Well Aware of them ( their state of affairs ) .
Surely , Allah does not do ( even ) an iota of injustice and if there be a good work , He doubles it and grants from His Presence an immense reward .
Then how it will be on the Day when We shall bring one witness from each Umma ( Community ) , and , ( O Beloved , ) We shall bring you as a witness against them all !
On that Day those who disbelieved and disobeyed the Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) would wish that ( after burying them ) the earth over them were levelled . And they will not be able to hide anything from Allah .
O Believers ! Do not go near Prayer in a drunken state until you are able to understand what you say . Nor ( should you approach Prayer ) until you bathe after total ablution becomes obligatory unless you are travelling . And if you are sick or on a journey or return from a call of nature or make sexual contact with ( your ) women and then fail to find water , clean yourselves by using pure soil . So wipe your faces and hands . Surely , Allah is Most Pardoning , Most Forgiving .
Have you not seen those who were given a portion of the ( revealed ) Book ? They buy misguidance and want you ( also ) to turn away from the straight path .
And Allah knows best your enemies and Allah is Sufficient ( as ) a Protector and Allah is Sufficient ( as ) a Helper .
And some among the Jews pervert the words ( of the Torah ) from their ( root ) places and say : We have heard but we disobey , and ( also say ) : Listen ! ( God forbid ! ) May you not be listened to , and twisting their tongues , scoffing at Din ( Religion ) they say : Raina . And , ( instead , ) if they had said : We have heard and obeyed , and ( Your Eminence ! Please ) give audience ( to our request ) and bless us with a ( benevolent and kind ) look , that would have been better for them and ( this utterance ) would have been right and appropriate ( too ) but Allah has cursed them owing to their disbelief . So they do not believe except a few .
O People of the Book ! Believe in ( that Book ) which We have revealed ( now to Our Beloved Muhammad , [ blessing and peace be upon him ] ) which ( originally ) confirms the Book that is with you , before We disfigure ( features of some ) faces and turn them on to their rear , or cast on them a curse like the one that We cast on those ( who disobeyed ) in the case of Sabbath . And the Commandment of Allah is bound to be executed .
Surely , Allah does not forgive setting up of partners with Him , and He forgives ( any other sin ) lesser in degree whom He wills . And whoever sets up partners with Allah certainly fabricates a horrible sin .
Have you not seen the people who show themselves off as pure ? Nay , Allah is the One Who purifies whom He pleases and they will not be wronged even equal to a thread .
Look ! How they invent a lie against Allah , and this manifest sin is simply sufficient ( for afflicting them with torment ) !
Have you not seen those who have been given a portion of ( the revealed ) Book ? ( In spite of that ) they believe in idols and Satan . And about the disbelievers they say : These ( disbelievers ) are better guided than the believers .
These are the people Allah has cursed , and you will not find at all any helper for the one whom Allah curses .
Have they any share in the Kingdom ? If so , they would not give ( anything ) to the people worth even a speck ( because of their niggardliness ) .
Do they ( Jews ) feel jealous of the people because of ( the blessings ) which Allah has conferred upon them of His Bounty ? So , surely We have given the family of Ibrahim ( Abraham ) the Book and wisdom , and We also granted them a great kingdom .
So , some of them believed in it and some turned away from it , and ( for those who turn away ) enough is the blazing Fire of Hell .
Surely those who disbelieved in Our Revelations , We shall soon hurl them into the Fire ( of Hell ) . When their skins are burnt off , We shall replace them with other skins so that they may taste the torment ( ceaselessly ) . Surely , Allah is Almighty , Most Wise .
Those who believe and stick to doing pious acts , We shall admit them to Gardens beneath which streams flow . They shall live there forever . Therein shall be pure spouses for them . And We shall admit them into plenteous deep shades .
Surely , Allah commands you to entrust the belongings to those who are worthy of them ; and when you judge matters among people , give judgment with justice . What an excellent advice Allah gives you ! Surely , Allah is All - Hearing , All - Seeing .
O Believers ! Obey Allah and obey the Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) and those ( men of Truth ) who hold command among you . Then if you disagree among yourselves over any issue , refer it to Allah and the Messenger ( [ blessings and peace be upon him ] for final judgment ) if you believe in Allah and the Last Day . That is best ( for you ) and best for the end result .
Have you not seen these ( hypocrites ) who claim ( verbally ) that they believe in this ( Book i . e . the Quran , ) which has been revealed to you and also in those ( revealed Books ) which were sent down before you ? ( But ) they desire to take their disputes ( for settlement ) to Satan ( i . e . the law based on defiance against Allahs Commandments ) although they have been ordained to reject it ( openly ) . And Satan only desires to lead them far astray .
And when they are asked to come to what Allah has revealed ( the Quran ) and to the Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) , you will see that the hypocrites turn away from ( coming towards ) you .
Then what will be their plight ( at that time ) when some disaster befalls them on account of their own crooked works , and they will appear before you swearing by Allah , ( saying ) : We intended nothing but piety and mutual harmony ?
These are the ( hypocrite and vicious ) people that Allah knows best every secret of their hearts . So , avoid them and admonish them persistently and establish effective communication with them about themselves .
And We have not sent any Messenger but that he must be obeyed by the Command of Allah . And , ( O Beloved , ) if they , having wronged their souls , had come to you imploring the forgiveness of Allah and the Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) had also asked forgiveness for them , then ( owing to this mediation and intercession ) they would certainly have found Allah Most Relenting , Ever - Merciful .
So , ( O Beloved , ) by your Lord they cannot become true believers until they make you a judge in every dispute that arises among them , and thereafter they do not feel any resentment in their hearts against the judgment that you make , and submit ( to your decision ) gladly , with total submission .
If We had prescribed for them : Kill yourselves or leave your homes and go away , only a few of them would have acted upon it . If they had abided by what they were advised to do , that would have been in their favour , enabling them to hold fast tenaciously ( to the Faith ) .
And then We too would have bestowed upon them a great reward from Our Presence .
And We would have surely guided them to the straight path .
And whoever obeys Allah and His Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) , they are the people who shall be in the company of those ( spiritual dignitaries on the Last Day ) whom Allah has blessed with His ( special ) favour : the Prophets , the Truthful , the Martyrs and the Most Pious . And how excellent these companions are !
This ( exceptional ) Bounty is from Allah and Allah suffices as a Knower .
O Believers ! Fit out for your safeguard , then set out as separate units or march off all together ( to stirve hard and eliminate militancy and terrorism ) .
And certainly there are some among you who delay ( slackening intentionally ) . Then if ( during war ) some adversity befalls you , he ( who tarries behind ) says : Indeed Allah has favoured me that I was not present with them ( in the battlefield ) .
But if some favour comes to you from Allah , ( then ) the same ( hypocrite ) shall ( regretfully ) say ( in the manner ) as if there was no friendship between you and him : Would that I had been with them , then I would also have achieved massive triumph .
So they ( the believers ) should fight in the cause of Allah ( for the promotion of good and human dignity ) who sell the life of this world for the Hereafter . And whoso fights in the way of Allah , whether he ( himself ) gets slain or wins victory , ( in both cases ) We shall soon bless him with great reward .
What has happened to you ( Muslims , ) that you do not fight in the cause of Allah ( for the freedom of the oppressed ) whereas those helpless ( oppressed and tyrannized ) men , women and children who , ( depressed by the oppression and tyranny , ) call out ( for their freedom ) : O our Lord ! Rescue us from this town whose ( affluent and influential ) people are oppressors and appoint for us some guardian from Your Presence and make someone our helper from Your Presence .
Those who believe fight in the way of Allah ( for the cause of peace and libration of the oppressed ) , and those who disbelieve fight in the way of Satan ( for evil and mischievous objectives ) . So , ( O Believers , ) fight against Satans allies ( the supporters of Satans mission ) . Surely Satans maneuvering is ineffective .
Have you not observed the state of those who were instructed ( in the beginning for a short period ) : Restrain your hands ( from fighting ) and establish Prayer and pay Zakat ( the Alms - due ) regularly ? ( So they were happy with it . ) But when the armed struggle ( against evil , tyranny and oppression ) was prescribed for them , a section of them started fearing ( hostile ) people the way one fears Allah or even more . And they said : O our Lord ! Why have You enjoined fighting upon us ( so soon ) ? Why have You not given us respite for another short period ? Say ( to them ) : Worldly interest is minor ( immaterial ) while the Hereafter is an extremely valuable ( blessing ) for the one who becomes God - wary and pious . There , you shall not be treated unjustly even equal to a thread .
( O you who abstain from the armed struggle due to fear of death ! ) Death will overtake you wherever you may be , ( even ) if you are in unconquerable fortresses . And ( this is their mentality that ) if some good fortune ( benefit ) comes to them , they say : It is from Allah ( i . e . intermediation and benevolence of the Messenger has no role in it ) , and if some adversity befalls them , they say : ( O Messenger ! ) It is from you ( i . e . because of you ) . Say : ( In fact , ) all comes from Allah . So , what has gone wrong with these people that they do not feel inclined to understand anything ?
( O man ! Train your self this way that ) if some good fortune comes to you ( consider that ) it is from Allah ( do not attribute it to the excellence of your strategy ) . And when some misfortune befalls you ( believe that ) it is from yourself ( attribute it to the evil in your own self ) . And , ( O Beloved , ) We have sent you as a Messenger to the whole mankind and Allah is Sufficient as a witness ( to your Messengership ) .
Whoever obeys the Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) obeys ( but ) Allah indeed , but he who turns away , then We have not sent you to watch over them .
And ( the state of these hypocrites is such that in your presence ) they say : ( We ) have obeyed ( your order ) . But when they depart from your Presence , a section of them opine at night contrary to what you have said ( and indulge in intriguing consultations ) . And Allah is recording ( all that ) which they plot all night . So , ( O Beloved , ) turn away your illumined face from them and trust Allah , and Sufficient is Allah as a Guardian .
Do they not ponder over the Quran ? Had this ( Quran come ) from anyone other than Allah , these people would have found in it many contradictions .
When there comes to them any news of peace or fear , they spread it around . Had they referred it to the Messenger ( blessing and peace be upon him ) or those of them who are in command ( instead of making it public ) , then those among them who can draw conclusion from some matter would have found it ( i . e . the truth of the news ) . Had there not been Allahs Favour to you and His Mercy , certainly you would ( all ) have followed Satan except only a few .
So , ( O Beloved , ) fight in the cause of Allah . You will not be held responsible ( for anyone else ) but your own soul . And motivate the believers ( for fighting ) . It will be no wonder if Allah smashes the attacking power of the disbelievers . And Allah is Strongest in hold as well as Hardest in punishment .
Whoever makes a righteous intercession has a ( fixed ) share ( in its reward ) , and he who makes an evil intercession has a ( fixed ) share ( in its sin ) , and Allah has Full Control over everything .
And when you are honoured with ( a word of ) greeting , then ( in reply ) greet with a better ( salutation ) or ( at least ) reciprocate ( in the same words ) . Surely Allah takes an account of everything .
Allah is He apart from Whom there is none worthy of worship . He shall certainly gather you on the Day of Resurrection about which there is no doubt . And who is more truthful in word than Allah ?
So what has happened to you that you are split into two groups with regard to the hypocrites , while Allah has overturned them ( i . e . their reason and contemplation ) owing to their misdeeds ? Do you seek to guide him to the straight road whom Allah has held strayed ( because of their own misdeeds ) ? And , ( O listener , ) you cannot at all find a way ( of guidance ) for him whom Allah holds misguided .
These ( the hypocrites ) wish that you should also disbelieve as they have disbelieved so that you all might become alike . So do not make friends with ( any of ) them until they emigrate in the Way of Allah ( in order to prove their faith and truthfulness ) . Then , if they turn away , seize them and kill them wherever you find them , and take not ( any of ) them either for a friend or for a helper .
But ( do not kill ) those who have allied with a people between you and whom there is a ( peace ) treaty , or who ( losing heart ) come to you in such a state that their breasts are afflicted ( with this obsession ) whether they should fight you or their own people . If Allah had so willed , He ( strengthening their hearts ) would have given them supremacy over you . Then they would certainly have fought you . So if they keep away from you and do not fight you and send you ( a message ) for peace , then ( in the interest of peace ) Allah has left no way open for you ( to launch any aggression ) against them .
Now you will find another category of people who desire to remain free of any threat from you ( by hypocritically pretending to believe ) , and ( also ) live in peace from their own community ( by siding with disbelievers secretly . But their true state is this that ) whenever they are turned to mischief ( and wickedness against Muslims ) they plunge ( headlong ) into it . So if they do not give up ( fighting against you , nor ) send you any ( message for ) peace , ( nor ) hold their hands off ( their disruptive activities ) , then seize ( and capture ) them and kill them wherever you find them . And it is they against whom We have granted you unrestricted authority .
And it is not ( lawful ) for a Muslim to kill a Muslim but by mistake ( i . e . unintentionally ) . And anyone who kills a Muslim unintentionally shall ( be liable to ) free a Muslim slave / slave girl and ( pay ) blood money , to be ( necessarily ) handed over to the heirs of the person slain , unless they remit it . In case , he ( the slain ) comes from the people who are your enemies and is a believer ( as well ) , then ( only ) freeing a slave / slave girl is prescribed . But if he ( the slain ) belongs to a people between you and whom is a ( peace ) treaty , then blood compensation must be delivered to his family , and freeing a Muslim slave / slave girl is also mandatory . Then he who does not find ( a slave or slave girl ) is ( bound ) to fast for two consecutive months . ( This is his ) repentance ( prescribed ) by Allah . And Allah is All - Knowing , Most Wise .
But he who kills a Muslim deliberately , his sentence will be Hell wherein will he abide for ages . Allah will afflict him with His wrath and will cast His curse on him . And He has prepared for him a dreadful torment .
O Believers ! When you set out ( to fight ) in the way of Allah , carry out a careful probe and do not say to him who greets you ( as a Muslim ) : You are not a believer . You seek goods of worldly life ( in the shape of spoils of war , after killing a Muslim declaring him a disbeliever ) . So , ( rest assured that ) Allah has gains and booties in plenty . Before this you ( too ) were the same . Then Allah conferred on you His Favour ( and you became Muslims ) . So investigate and confirm the truth ( about others as well ) . Surely , Allah is Well Aware of what you do .
Those of the Muslims who ( shirking fight ) stay back ( home ) without any stressful condition ( excuse ) , and those who fight in the cause of Allah with their material as well as human resources cannot be equal ( in their reward and grading ) . Allah has exalted in rank those who fight in the cause of Allah with their material as well as human resources above those who stay back withdrawn . Allah has ( surely ) promised good to all ( the believers , yet ) He has bestowed the merit of excellence with a mighty reward ( and bounty ) to those who strive hard over those who stay behind .
There are ( for them multiple ) degrees of higher grades from Him and Forgiveness and Mercy . And Allah is Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
Indeed those whose lives angels take in such a state that ( due to living in an environment of injustice , oppression and extremism ) they have ruined their souls , the angels ask them : What condition were you in ? ( You neither struggled to promote justice , tolerance and peace nor left for the land of equity and peace . ) They ( regretfully ) reply : We were powerless and helpless in the land . The angels will say : Was not Allahs earth vast enough for you to emigrate in it ( somewhere ) ? So it is they whose abode is Hell , and what an evil abode that is !
Except for those really helpless men , women and children who neither are capable to make any plan nor do they know any way ( to escape from there ) .
They are those whom Allah shall certainly spare , and Allah is Most Pardoning , Most Forgiving .
And he who emigrates leaving his home in the way of Allah will find ( for Hijra - emigration ) many places in the earth and plentiful provision ( for sustenance ) , and he who leaves his home , emigrating towards Allah and His Messenger and then death overtakes him ( on the way ) , his reward with Allah is ensured and Allah is Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
And when you travel in the land , there will be no sin on you if you shorten the Prayer ( i . e . offer two instead of four mandatory cycles ) , if you fear that the disbelievers are likely to afflict you with distress . Assuredly , the disbelievers are your open enemies .
And , ( O Beloved , ) when you are ( present ) among these ( soldiers ) , form up for them ( congregational ) Prayer . A squad of them , retaining their arms , should ( first ) stand by you ( to follow you in Prayer ) ; having performed their prostrations , they should , ( getting aside , ) take position in your rear . And ( now ) another squad who has not ( yet ) prayed should come up and pray with you ( under your leadership ) ; they should ( also ) hold on to their security measures and retain their weapons ( persistently ) . The infidels want you to become neglectful of your weapons and other means of defence that they may launch a sudden attack against you . If you face a problem due to rain or disease , there is no harm if you ( remove and ) set your weapons aside , and hold fast to your means of security . Verily , Allah has prepared a humiliating torment for the disbelievers .
So , ( O Muslims , ) when you have finished your Prayers , remember Allah ( in all postures : ) standing , sitting and ( lying down ) on your sides . And when ( free of fear ) you feel secure , establish Prayers ( as prescribed ) . Verily , Prayer is obligatory for Muslims in accordance with the fixed timings .
And do not slacken in pursuing the foes . If you are afflicted with pain ( in this pursuit ) then they also face but ( similar ) suffering as you are exposed to . But you have hope ( of reward and bounty ) from Allah which they do not . And Allah is All - Knowing , Most Wise .
( O Glorious Messenger ! ) Surely We have revealed to you the Book based on Truth so that you may judge between the people in accordance with ( the Truth ) which Allah has shown to you . And ( never ) become a contender on behalf of the treacherous ones .
And implore Allahs forgiveness . Allah is indeed Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
And do not plead ( in defence of ) those who are deceiving their own souls . Surely , Allah does not like anyone who is a committed betrayer and sinner .
They hide ( their deceitfulness ) from people ( feeling ashamed ) , but feel no shame before Allah while He is with them when they hold consultations ( secretly ) at night about that matter which Allah disapproves . And Allah has encompassed whatever they do .
Beware ! You are those who pleaded on their behalf in the life of this world , but who will contend with Allah on their behalf ( even ) on the Day of Resurrection , or who will be their advocate ( on that Day too ) ?
And he who commits evil or wrongs his own soul and then seeks Allahs forgiveness will find Allah Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
And whoever commits sin is only bringing ( its consequent misery ) to his own soul and Allah is All - Knowing , Most Wise .
And whoever commits some error or sin and then casts its blame on some innocent person has certainly taken ( the burden of ) a calumny and an open sin .
And , ( O Beloved , ) had not Allahs Bounty and Mercy been upon you , a party of these ( treacherous ) people had resolved to lead you astray whereas they are only leading themselves astray and can no way do any harm to you . And Allah has revealed to you the Book and Wisdom and has bestowed upon you all that knowledge which you did not possess . Mighty indeed is Allahs Bounty on you .
There is no good in most of their secret consultations except only ( the counsel ) of the person who enjoins charity or piety or peace - making among people . And whoever does this seeking Allahs pleasure , We shall soon bless him with a mighty reward .
But whoever opposes the Messenger ( Allah bless him and give him peace ) after the path of guidance has become clear to him , and follows the path other than that of the believers , We shall keep him in the same ( state of disorientation ) he has ( himself ) turned to , and shall ( eventually ) cast him into Hell and that is an evil dwelling .
Assuredly , Allah does not forgive ( the sin of ) setting up any partner with Him , but He forgives any ( sin ) lesser than that whom He wills . And the one who associates anything with Allah as His partner has surely strayed far off .
These ( polytheists ) worship merely the feminine objects apart from Allah , and they worship only Satan , the rebel .
( Satan ) on whom Allah has laid His curse and who said : I will certainly pull off ( for myself ) an appointed portion of Your servants .
I will , for sure , lead them estray , arouse in them foul aspirations and keep directing them . So they will definitely incise the ears of cattle . And indeed I shall command them persistently . So they will surely alter what Allah has created . And whoever forsakes Allah and takes Satan for a friend suffers most certainly a perceptible loss .
Satan makes to them ( false ) promises and stirs up in them ( deceitful ) hopes , and Satan makes not any promise to them except deception .
They are the people whose abode is Hell and they shall not find any way to escape from it .
But those who have believed and kept doing pious acts , We shall soon admit them to Gardens with rivers flowing beneath . They shall reside in them for ever . This is Allahs true promise , and who can be more truthful in Word than Allah ?
( Allahs promise of salvation ) does not accord with what you desire , nor with what the People of the Book aspire to . Whoever does an evil deed will be punished for it , and he will not find for himself any supporter or helper apart from Allah .
But anyone , whether man or woman , who does pious acts and is a believer , they are the ones who shall enter Paradise and shall not be wronged a speck .
And with regard to Din ( Religion ) , who can be better than whoever submits his whole being entirely to Allah while he also holds spiritual excellence , and persistently follows Din ( Religion ) of Ibrahim ( Abraham ) a devotee ( to Allah and ) upright ? And Allah had taken Ibrahim ( Abraham ) for a sincere and intimate friend . ( So , he also becomes Allahs friend by virtue of his spiritual affiliation to Ibrahim [ Abraham ] . )
And to Allah belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth and Allah has encompassed everything .
And , ( O Prophet , ) people ask about your edict on matters concerning ( orphan ) women . Say : Allah ordains you in their case and the commandment ( already ) being communicated to you in the holy Book ( also ) pertains to those orphan women whom you deny ( the rights ) which have been prescribed for them . And ( in order to take their assets into possession ) you want to marry them . In addition to that , there is ( also a decree ) on affairs concerning helpless minor children , that stick to justice in matters of orphans . And whatever good you do , Allah is indeed Well Aware of that .
If a woman fears maltreatment or indifference on the part of her husband , there is no harm if both ( husband and wife ) reconcile on some appropriate accord , and reconciliation ( in truth ) is best . The human nature has ( no doubt ) been made ( more or less ) self - seeking , but if you practise benevolence and guard yourselves against evil , Allah is indeed Well Aware of the works that you do .
And you simply do not have the ability to do ( ideal ) justice amongst your ( more than one ) wives , however ardently you may desire to do it . Do not , therefore , incline with absolute fondness ( towards one , thus ) leaving the other like something suspended ( in the midst ) . But if you mend your ways and refrain ( from injustice and maltreatment ) , Allah is Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
And if both ( husband and wife ) end up in separation , Allah will make each of them independent ( of the other ) out of His Own Abundance and Allah is All - Embracing , Most Wise .
And to Allah belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth . And no doubt We enjoined those ( too ) who were given the Book before you and ( have ordained ) you ( as well ) to keep fearing Allah . But if you disobey , then assuredly whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth ( all ) belongs to Allah , and Allah is Beyond All Needs , Ever - Praiseworthy .
And to Allah belongs whatever is in the heavens and all that is in the earth ; and enough is Allah to be the Guardian .
O People ! If He wills , He may eliminate you and bring others ( in your place ) and Allah is All - Powerful to do this .
Whoever desires the reward of the world , then with Allah is the reward of ( both ) the world and the Hereafter and Allah is All - Hearing , All - Seeing .
O Believers ! Become tenaciously firm on justice , bearing witness ( merely ) for the sake of Allah even if ( the witness ) is against your own selves or ( your ) parents or ( your ) relatives . Whether the person ( against whom is the evidence ) is rich or poor , Allah is a greater Well - Wisher of them both ( than you are ) . So do not follow the desires of your ( ill - commanding ) selves lest you swerve from justice . But if ( while giving evidence ) you engineer your statement or evade ( the truth ) , then Allah is indeed Well Aware of ( all the works ) that you are doing .
O Believers ! Put faith in Allah and His Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) and in the Book which He has revealed to His Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) and the Book that He revealed before ( it ) . And he who denies Allah , His angels , His Books , His Messengers and the Last Day has surely strayed far away .
Indeed those who believe , then disbelieve and then believe again and reject faith once more and then advance further in denying faith , Allah will never ( incline to ) forgive them , nor guide them to the straight road .
( O Prophet ! ) Convey to the hypocrites the news that a grievous torment awaits them .
( They are ) those who make friends with disbelievers instead of the believers . Do they seek honour in their company ? So , all veneration ( and glory ) belongs only to Almighty Allah .
And indeed Allah has revealed to you this ( Command ) in the Book that when you hear Allahs Revelations being denied and ridiculed , do not sit in their company until they engage in some other discourse ( renouncing the denial and ridicule ) . Otherwise you too will become like them . Surely Allah will assemble the hypocrites and the disbelievers together in Hell .
Those ( hypocrites ) who pry into your ( victory and setback ) , then if you are granted victory by Allah , they say : Were we not with you ? And if the disbelievers get a portion ( of some apparent breakthrough ) , they say ( to them ) : Did we not get the better of you and ( in spite of that ) did we not save you from ( ruin at the hands of ) Muslims ? So , Allah will judge between you on the Day of Resurrection and never will Allah allow the disbelievers anyway to ( overpower ) the Muslims .
Surly the hypocrites ( self - deluding ) seek to deceive Allah while He is to make them suffer for their ( own ) deception . And when they stand up for Prayer , they do it sluggishly , ( simply ) for showing off to the people . And they ( also ) remember Allah but little .
Confounded between ( belief and disbelief ) , they belong neither to ( the disbelievers ) nor to ( the believers ) . And he whom Allah holds astray you shall not find for him any road ( to guidance ) .
O Believers ! Make not friends with disbelievers instead of believers . Do you wish to set a manifest evidence for Allah against you ( through friendship with the disbelievers ) ?
The hypocrites will surely be in the lowest depth of Hell and you will never find for them any helper .
But those who repent , make amends , and establish a firm bond with Allah , and make their Din ( faith and devotion ) sincerely for Allah will be in the company of the believers . And Allah will soon bestow a tremendous reward upon the believers .
Why should Allah torment you if you become grateful and believe ? And Allah is Most Appreciative ( of every truth ) , Well Aware ( of every act ) .
Allah does not like anyones foul words being voiced loud ( publicly and openly ) except by one who has been a victim of oppression ; ( he is allowed to expose the cruelty of the oppressor ; ) and Allah is All - Hearing , All - Knowing .
Whether you make a good act known or keep it hidden or excuse some ( ones ) evil act , Allah is indeed Most Forgiving , All - Powerful .
Surely , those who disbelieve in Allah and His Messengers and seek to discriminate between Allah and His Messengers and say : We believe in some and deny the others , and intend to find a way in between ( belief and disbelief ) .
They are the ones who are in fact the disbelievers . And We have prepared a humiliating torment for the disbelievers .
But those who believed in Allah and ( all ) His Messengers and , ( in embracing faith , ) made no distinction between any of these ( Messengers ) , He would soon pay them their rewards . And Allah is Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
( O Beloved ! ) The People of the Book ask you to bring down to them a Book from heaven ( completely inscribed in one go ) . They asked Musa ( Moses ) for something even greater than that ; they said : Show us Allah visibly ( in Person ) . So owing to ( their ) transgression ( i . e . this denigrating demand ) a thunderbolt seized them . ( They died and were later raised to life by Musas ( Moses ) prayer . ) Then they adopted the calf ( as their god ) after the clear Signs ( pointing to the Truth ) had reached them . Then We overlooked this ( sin ) as well and bestowed upon Musa ( Moses ) a marked dominance over them .
And ( when the Jews again rejected the injunctions contained in the Torah , ) We raised ( and suspended the Mount of ) Tur over them in order to take a ( firm ) promise from them . And We commanded them : Enter the gate ( of this city - the Ailia gate ) prostrating ( in gratitude ) , and We ( also ) said to them : Do not also violate the Sabbath ( prohibition of fishing on Saturday ) , and We took from them a reiterated and firm promise .
So ( they were afflicted with punishments ) because of their breaking the promise , rejecting the Revelations of Allah , killing the Prophets unjustly ( and also owing to ) their saying : Our hearts are ( wrapped ) in covers . ( Nay , that was not the truth ; ) the fact is that Allah has sealed their hearts due to their disbelief . So , except for a few , they will not accept faith .
And ( moreover ) owing to their rejection of faith and uttering against Maryam ( Mary ) a grave calumny .
And ( also ) because of their uttering ( the boastful claim ) : We ( have ) killed Allahs Messenger , the Messiah , Isa son of Maryam ( Jesus son of Mary ) , whereas they neither killed nor crucified him . But ( in truth ) someone was made the like ( of Isa Jesus ) in their view . But those who disagree about him have surely fallen prey to doubt ( concerning ) this ( murder ) . They know nothing ( what the truth is ) except ( that they are ) following fancy . And they certainly did not murder Isa ( Jesus ) .
In fact Allah lifted him up towards Himself ( in heaven ) and Allah is Almighty , Most Wise .
And , ( shortly before the Last Hour at the time of the Messiahs descent , ) there will not be any ( individual or sect ) of the People of the Book but will ( rightly ) believe in Isa ( Jesus ) before his death ; and Isa ( Jesus ) will bear witness to them on the Day of Resurrection .
Then on account of injustice on the part of the Jews , We made unlawful for them ( many ) pure provisions that had been made lawful for them ( before ) , and ( also ) for the reason that they hindered ( people ) at a large scale from the path of Allah .
And ( also ) because of their taking usury , despite that they were forbidden to do it , and because of their usurping others wealth wrongfully ( they were punished ) . And We have prepared a torturous torment for those of them who disbelieve .
But those among them who possess substantial knowledge and faith ( equally ) believe in ( the Revelation ) that has been sent down to you and ( the Revelation ) that was sent down before you . And ( how righteous they are ! ) they establish the Prayer regularly , and pay Zakat ( the Alms - due ) persistently , and keep faith in Allah and the Day of Resurrection . They are the ones who We shall soon pay a mighty wage .
( O Beloved ! ) Indeed We have sent Revelation to you as We sent it to Nuh ( Noah ) and ( other ) Messengers after him ; and We also sent Revelation to Ibrahim ( Abraham ) , Ismail ( Ishmael ) , Ishaq ( Isaac ) , Yaqub ( Jacob ) and ( his ) children and Isa ( Jesus ) , Ayyub ( Job ) , Yunus ( Jonah ) , Harun ( Aaron ) and Sulaiman ( Solomon ) ; and We conferred the Zabur ( Book of Psalms ) upon Dawud ( David ) .
And ( We have sent many ) Messengers whose annals We have narrated to you earlier ; and We sent ( a number of ) those Messengers whose details We have not ( yet ) related to you ; and Allah ( also ) spoke to Musa ( [ Moses ] directly ) .
The Messengers who were Bearers of good news and Warners ( were sent ) so that after ( the arrival of these ) Messengers people may not have any plea against Allah . And Allah is Almighty , Most Wise .
( O Beloved ! Whether somebody believes in your Prophethood or not , ) Allah ( Himself ) bears witness to ( this fact that ) whatever He has sent down to you has sent down with His knowledge . And the angels ( too ) bear witness to that effect ( for your sake ) , and Allah is All - Sufficient as a witness .
Verily , those who disbelieved ( i . e . belied the Prophethood of Muhammad [ blessings and peace be upon him ] and hindered ( people ) from the path of Allah , they undoubtedly went far astray ( from the Truth ) .
Indeed those who have disbelieved ( by denying Allahs witness ) and done injustice ( by denying the Messengers glory ) , Allah will by no means forgive them , nor will show them any path ( on the Day of Judgment ) .
Except the path of Hell wherein they shall dwell beyond the count of time and that is easy for Allah .
O mankind ! Indeed this Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) has come to you with the Truth from your Lord . So believe ( in him ) for your own good . But if you disbelieve ( i . e . deny his Prophethood then bear in mind that He is Beyond Any Need of you because ) whatever is in the heavens and the earth belongs to Allah indeed . And Allah is All - Knowing , Most Wise .
O People of the Book ! Exceed not the limits in your Din ( Religion ) and speak nothing but the truth about Allahs glory . The fact is simple that the Messiah , Isa son of Maryam ( Jesus son of Mary ) , is Allahs Messenger and His Word which He conveyed to Maryam ( Mary ) and a Spirit from Him . So believe in Allah and His Messengers and do not say : There are three ( Gods ) . Refrain ( from this belief ) ; ( that ) is best for you . Verily , Allah is the Only One God , Holy is He , far above having a son . Whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth ( all ) belongs to Him alone . And Sufficient is Allah as Guardian .
The Messiah feels no embarrassment in being a servant of Allah . Nor do the closest angels ( ever feel ashamed ) . And whoever disdains to be His servant and perpetrates arrogance , He will soon assemble together all such people before Him .
So those who believe and persist in doing pious deeds He will pay them their wages in full and will ( then ) award them more out of His Bounty . But those who disdain ( worshipping Allah ) and behave arrogantly , He will punish them with grievous torment , and they will not find for them any friend or helper besides Allah .
O mankind ! ( The most vital , perfect , clear and ) a conclusive evidence has reached you from your ( Ever - Glorious and Most Exalted ) Lord ( in the form of the Holy Being of the Prophet Muhammad [ blessings and peace be upon him ] ) . And ( besides ) We have ( also ) sent down to you the brightening and radiant light ( in the shape of the Holy Quran ) .
So , those who believe in Allah and hold fast to His ( embrace , Allah ) will soon admit them to His ( exceptional ) Mercy and Grace and will show them the straight path to ( reach ) Him .
They seek edict ( i . e . judgment under Islamic Law ) from you . Say : Allah ordains pertaining to ( the inheritance of ) kalala ( the deceased leaving neither children nor parents behind ) : If a man dies childless but has one sister , she shall have ( as her share ) half ( the property ) that he leaves . ( If , on the contrary , a sister is kalala , then in the case of her death ) the brother will be ( the sole ) heir ( to his sister ) , if she has no children . Then if ( after a kalala brothers death ) two ( sisters ) are ( the heirs ) , they are entitled to share two - thirds of ( the property ) he leaves . And if ( in the case of the deceased who is kalala ) he has some brothers and sisters , male ( as well as ) female heirs , then the share of each male shall be as much as the ( portion of ) two females . Allah is clearly explaining to you ( these laws ) lest you should go astray . And Allah knows everything well .
O Believers ! Fulfil ( your ) promises . The quadrupeds ( i . e . cattle ) have been made lawful for you except those ( animals ) that will be announced to you afterwards . ( But ) when clad in Ihram ( the Pilgrims sacred dress ) , do not presume hunting lawful . Surely Allah ordains what He wills .
O Believers ! Do not denigrate the Signs of Allah , nor the sacred ( and venerable ) month ( i . e . anyone of Dhul - Qada , Dhul - Hijja , Muharram and Rajab ) , nor the sacrificial animals sent to the Sacred House the Kaba and nor the animals brought to Makka with ritual straps around their necks . Also do not violate the sanctity of ( life and property , and honour and dignity of ) those resorting to the Sacred House the Kaba , ( for they are the ones ) seeking bounty and pleasure of their Lord . And when you take off Ihram ( the Pilgrims garb ) , then you are allowed to hunt . And never let the enmity of a people incite you to aggression ( against them ) since they barred you from the Sacred House ( i . e . visiting the Kaba ) . And always support one another in ( the works of ) righteousness and piety but do not become accomplices in ( works of ) sin and transgression . And fear Allah persistently . Indeed Allah awards severe punishment ( to those who disobey and defy ) .
Forbidden to you is carrion ( the animal that dies and is not slaughtered according to Islamic Law ) and ( the discharged ) blood and pork and that ( animal ) on which the name of someone other than Allah has been invoked while slaughtering , and ( the animal ) that dies by strangling or by a violent blow ( not by any sharp instrument ) or by falling from a height or the one that has been gored to death or which has been ripped apart and gnawed by a wild beast , save the one which you slaughter ( before it dies ) , and ( that animal too is forbidden ) which has been slaughtered on idolatrous altars ( dedicated to false gods ) . And this ( is also unlawful ) that you learn your fortune through raffling ( with arrows or divide shares by such means ) . All these works are sins .
This day the disbelievers have lost all hopes of ( their heinous designs because ) your Din ( [ Religion ] has prevailed ) . So , ( O Believers , ) fear them not and always fear Me alone .
Today I have perfected your Din ( Religion ) for you , and have completed My Blessing upon you , and have chosen for you Islam ( as ) Din ( a complete code of life ) . Then if one gets into a survival situation ( forced by ) ravenous hunger ( and intense thirst i . e . driven by dire necessity , provided ) he is not prone to sinning ( i . e . eats what is forbidden without being wilfully inclined to sin ) , then Allah is indeed Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
People ask you what has been made lawful for them . Say ( to them ) : The pure provisions are declared lawful for you . And the hunting animals that you have tamed running after game and , this way , teach them ( the methods of hunting ) which Allah has taught you ; so eat ( also ) of that ( prey ) which the hunting animals hold on for you ( after hunting ) . And pronounce the Name of Allah over that ( hunting beast when you unleash it for hunting ) . And keep fearing Allah . Indeed Allah is Swift in calling to account .
This day good and pure things have been made lawful for you . And the sacrificed animal of those given the ( Revealed ) Book is ( also ) lawful for you , while your sacrificed animal is lawful for them . And ( likewise ) chaste Muslim women as well as chaste women from amongst those given the Book before you ( are lawful for you ) when you have paid them their dower , ( provided ) you marry them for a conjugal life ( adhering to chasteness and decency ) and not for open lasciviousness ( merely satisfying your lust ) , nor for secret love affairs . The one who denies faith ( in the Commandments of Allah ) , all his work is ruined and he will ( also ) be among the losers in the Hereafter .
O Believers ! When ( you intend ) to stand for Prayer then ( for ablution ) wash your faces and hands up to the elbows , and pass your wet hands over your heads and ( also wash ) your feet up to the ankles . And if you are in a state of obligation for total ablution , purify yourselves well ( by bathing ) . Should you be ill or on a journey , or someone of you comes ( after ) defecation , or you have had sexual contact ( intercourse ) with women and then you do not find water , ( in these cases , ) perform tayammum with clean soil . So , it is wiping your faces and ( full ) hands with it ( i . e . clean soil ) . Allah does not want to make things anyway hard for you , but He wants to purify you , and complete the bestowal of His Favour upon you so that you may become grateful .
And call to mind the Favour of Allah ( conferred ) upon you , and ( also recall ) the promise which He took from you ( under affirmation ) when you declared ( agreeing ) : We heard ( Allahs Command ) and we obeyed ( it ) . And always fear Allah . Verily Allah knows best ( the secrets of ) hearts .
O Believers ! Holding fast to the cause of Allah , bear witness based on justice . And let not ( even ) the extreme hostility against a people provoke you into abstaining from justice ( in their case ) . Always do justice , ( for ) it is akin to piousness . And fear Allah . Indeed Allah is Well Aware of your works .
Allah has promised forgiveness and a mighty reward for those who believe and persist in piety and righteous actions .
But those who disbelieve and deny Our Revelations , they are the people who will be ( on fire ) in Hell .
O Believers ! Call to mind ( that ) Favour of Allah ( which ) was bestowed upon you when a people ( who disbelieved ) resolved to stretch out their hands against you ( for killing and destruction ) but Allah held back their hands from you . And always fear Allah ; and the believers must always rely on Allah alone .
And indeed Allah took a firm promise from the Children of Israel and We appointed among them twelve chieftains ( for its fulfilment , enforcement and protection ) . And Allah said ( to the Children of Israel ) : I am with you ( i . e . My special support and reinforcement will escort you ) . If you establish Prayer and pay Zakat ( the Alms - due ) consistently , and ( always ) adhere to believing in My Messengers , and furnish persistent support to their ( Prophetic Mission ) , and lend Allah a handsome loan ( for financing , promotion and prevalence of His Din [ Religion ] ) , I will certainly remove your sins from you , and will assuredly admit you to the Gardens with streams flowing beneath . Then , later , whoever from among you rejects faith ( i . e . violates the promise ) indeed strays from the straight path .
Then We laid Our curse on them because of their breach of promise ( i . e . they were deprived of Our Mercy ) , and We made their hearts callous ( i . e . they were deprived of guidance and susceptibility . So , ) they change the Words ( of Allahs Book ) from their ( right ) places and have forgotten a ( major ) portion of that ( guidance ) which they were urged upon . And you will continue being informed about one or the other of their treachery , except a few of them ( who have embraced faith ) . So pardon them and forbear . Indeed Allah loves the benefactors .
And We ( also ) took a ( similar ) promise from those who say : We are Christians . Then , they ( too ) forgot a ( major ) portion of that ( guidance ) which they were urged upon . So , ( owing to this breach of promise , ) We infected them with mutual hostility and spite till the Day of Resurrection . And Allah will soon unveil to them ( the reality of the acts ) which they used to perpetrate .
O People of the Book ! Indeed there has come to you Our Messenger who unfolds to you ( clearly ) many such things from the Book as you have been concealing and who overlooks many of ( your ) wrongs ( too ) . There has indeed come to you a light from Allah ( i . e . Muhammad [ blessings and peace be upon him ] ) and an Enlightening Book ( i . e . the Holy Quran ) .
By this Allah guides those who seek His pleasure to the paths to peace ( and security ) , and takes them out of darkness ( of ignorance and disbelief ) by His Command , and leads them to the light ( of faith and guidance ) and directs them towards the straight road .
They have indeed committed disbelief who say : Verily , Allah is ( but ) the Messiah , son of Maryam ( Mary ) . Say : Who is then ( the one ) who can possess a bit ( of the will ) of Allah . If He should so decide as to destroy Messiah son of Maryam and his mother and all that are on earth , ( who can save them against His will ) ? And the sovereignty of the heavens , the earth and ( the universe ) that exists between them , ( all ) belongs to Allah alone . He creates what He wills and Allah has Absolute Power over everything .
And the Jews and the Christians say : We are the sons of Allah and His beloved ones . Say : ( If your statement is correct ) then why does He punish you for your sins ? Rather ( the truth is that ) of all ( the Creation ) Allah has brought into being , you ( too ) are ( but ) a human being ( i . e . just like other human species ) . He forgives whom He pleases and chastises whom He wills . And the sovereignty of the heavens , the earth and ( the universe ) that exists between them ( all ) belongs to Allah alone and to Him ( everyone ) has to return .
O People of the Book ! Indeed Our ( Last ) Prophet has come to you ( at the juncture ) when ( the chain of ) Messengers succession is breaking off , and he expounds to you ( Our Commands and Injunctions ) with ample clarity , ( because ) you may ( by way of excuse ) say : There has come to us no Bearer of good news or a Warner . ( Now this excuse of yours has also lost ground because ) undoubtedly ( the Final ) Bearer of glad tidings and Warner has come to you , and Allah has Absolute Power over everything .
And ( recall the time ) when Musa ( Moses ) said to his people : O my people ! Recollect the blessing Allah ( bestowed ) upon you when He raised Prophets from amongst you and made you kings and gave ( so ) much to you which He had not given to anyone else in all the worlds ( in your contemporary period ) .
O my people ! Enter the holy land ( of Syria or Bait al - Maqdis [ Jerusalem ] ) which Allah has decreed for you , and do not turn back ( in retreat ) or you will turn back as losers .
They said ( in reply ) : O Musa ( Moses ) ! There are mighty ( tyrant ) people ( living ) therein , and we shall never enter this ( land ) until they quit it . So , if they depart from here then we will certainly enter it .
Two men from among ( a few ) who feared ( Allah ) and whom Allah had favoured with His Blessing ( said to their folk : ) Enter the gate ( of the city invading ) these people ( dauntlessly ) . Once you enter this ( gate ) , you will certainly be victorious . And put your trust in Allah alone provided you are people of faith .
They said : O Musa ( Moses ) ! Never shall we enter this ( land ) so long as they are in it . So you ( along with ) your Lord go and fight ( against them ) ; we are sitting right here .
( Musa [ Moses ] ) submitted : My Lord ! I have no control ( over anyone ) except for myself and my brother ( Harun [ Aaron ] ) . So put us apart from ( these ) wicked people ( by Your Command ) .
( The Lord ) said : So this ( land ) is forbidden to these ( rebels ) for forty years . ( Anguished , ) they will keep wandering around the earth distractedly . So you will not grieve , ( O Musa , [ Moses ] ) over the ( warning plight ) of these disobedient and unruly people .
( O Most Esteemed Messenger ! ) Relate to these people the account of two sons of Adam ( Habil and Qabil [ Abel and Cain ] ) which is absolutely true . When both of them made offering ( one each to Allah ) , the offering from one of them ( Habil [ Abel ] ) was accepted while that from the other ( Qabil [ Cain ] ) was not accepted . Thereupon , he ( Qabil [ Cain ] ) said to Habil ( Abel out of jealousy and vengeance ) : I will surely kill you . He ( Habil [ Abel ] ) said ( in reply ) : Indeed , Allah accepts ( offering ) only from the self - protecting .
If you stretch forth your hand against me to kill me , ( even then ) I shall not stretch out my hand against you in order to kill you because I fear Allah , the Sustainer of all the worlds .
I want ( I commit no offence and ) you take my sin ( i . e . sin of killing me ) , and also your own sin ( the preceding one on account of which your offering has been rejected all ) on you . You will then become one of the inmates of Hell . And that is but the punishment of the wrongdoers .
Then the ( ill - commanding ) self of Qabil ( Cain ) made the killing of his brother Habil ( Abel ) easy ( and tempting ) for him . So , he killed him and became one of the losers .
Then Allah sent a crow that started scratching the earth to show him how to hide his brothers corpse . ( Seeing this , ) he said : Alas ! Could I not become even the like of this crow that I might hide the corpse of my brother ! So he became one of the remorseful people .
On account of this We prescribed ( this Commandment in the Torah sent down ) to the Children of Israel that whoever killed a person ( unjustly ) , except as a punishment for murder or for ( spreading ) disorder in the land ( i . e . punishment for bloodshed and robbery etc . ) , it would be as if he killed all the people ( of society ) ; and whoever ( saved him from unjust murder and ) made him survive , it would be as if he saved the lives of all the people ( of society ; i . e . he rescued the collective system of human life ) . And indeed Our Messengers came to them with evident Signs . Yet , even after that , the majority from among these people are certainly those who commit excesses in the land .
Indeed those who wage war against Allah and His Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) and remain engaged in creating mischief in the land ( i . e . perpetrate terrorism , robbery and burglary among the Muslims ) , their punishment is that they be slain , or hanged to death , or their hands and their feet on opposite sides be cut off , or they be exiled far from ( i . e . deprived of moving about in ) the homeland ( i . e . either by banishment or by imprisonment ) . That is the humiliation for them in this world , and for them there is a terrible torment in the Hereafter ( as well ) .
Except those who turn to Allah in repentance before you overpower them . So , know that Allah is Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
O Believers ! Fear Allah persistently and keep looking for means to ( approach and get closer to ) Him and strive hard in His way so that you may prosper .
Assuredly those who disbelieve , if they possess all ( the riches and treasures ) that exist in the earth , and even with it as much more so that they may offer it as ransom ( a recompense for their souls to redeem themselves ) from the torment of the Day of Resurrection , ( all that too ) will not be accepted from them and there is a torturous punishment for them .
They will desire to get out of Hell ( somehow ) , whereas they will not be able to get out of it . And their torment will be eternal .
( After proper judicial trial as per law ) cut off the hands of both the man as well as the woman who steal , in retribution of ( the offence ) which they have committed , a deterring punishment from Allah . And Allah is Almighty , Most Wise .
Then the one who repents after ( this ) wrong and mends his ways , Allah surely turns towards him in Mercy . Allah is indeed Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
( O man ! ) Do you not know that ( the Absolute ) Sovereignty of the heavens and the earth belongs to Allah alone ? He torments whom He wills and forgives whom He pleases and Allah has Absolute Power over everything .
O Messenger ! Those , who ( advance ) fast into disbelief , should not grieve you . ( Firstly ) they include those ( hypocrites ) who utter from their mouth : We believe , while their hearts have not accepted faith . ( Secondly ) among them are the Jews . They listen to ( you ) eagerly to fabricate lies . They ( in fact ) hear ( to spy ) for others who have not ( yet ) come to you . ( They are the people ) who change the Words ( of Allah even ) after their contexts ( are fixed and ) say : If you are given this ( command which they like ) , take it , and if you are not given this ( command ) , then keep off ( it ) . And if Allah adjudges someone to go astray then you do not have any power for him ( to hold up the Command of ) Allah . They are the ones whose hearts Allah has no intention whatsoever to purify . For them there is ignominy ( of disbelief ) in this world and mighty punishment in the Hereafter .
( They ) are the ones who spy to coin lies . ( Moreover , ) they voraciously devour unlawful wealth and property . If they approach you ( with a dispute for judgment ) then it is ( up to ) you whether to judge between them or decline . And if you opt to keep away from them ( even then ) they are incapable of doing you any harm but if you judge , then judge between them ( too but ) with justice ( i . e . their enmity should not restrain judgment based on justice ) . Undoubtedly , Allah loves those who do justice .
And how can they accept you as a judge while they have the Torah with them wherein is ( revealed ) the Commandment of Allah ? Yet they turn away ( from the Truth even ) after that . And they are the ones who will not ( at all ) embrace faith .
Indeed , We revealed the Torah wherein was guidance and light . In accordance with that the Messengers who were the obedient ( servants of Allah ) used to give orders to the Jews . And the divines ( i . e . their spiritual masters ) and the rabbis ( also judged in accordance with that ) because they were assigned to safeguard the Book of Allah and they were the guardians of ( and witness to ) it . So do not fear people ( in establishing Din [ Religion ] and enforcing Allahs Commandments ) , and always fear Me ( alone ) , and do not barter My Signs ( Commands ) for a paltry price ( of this world ) . And he who does not judge ( and rule ) according to the Injunctions sent down by Allah , it is they who are disbelievers .
In that ( the Torah ) We had prescribed for them : A life for a life , an eye for an eye , a nose for a nose , an ear for an ear , and a tooth for a tooth and in the case of injuries ( too ) there is a requital . But the person who ( foregoes ) this ( requital ) by way of charity , this will serve as an atonement for his ( sins ) . And he who does not judge ( and rule ) in compliance with the Commandments sent down by Allah , it is they who are the transgressors .
And following in the footsteps of these ( Messengers ) We sent Isa son of Maryam ( Jesus son of Mary ) confirming the Book ( the Torah ) revealed before him . And We gave him the Injil ( the Gospel ) which contained guidance and light , and ( the Injil [ the Gospel ] too ) confirmed the ( Book ) Torah that preceded it . And it was ( an absolute ) guidance and admonition for the Godfearing .
And the people of the Injil ( [ the Gospel ] too ) are required to judge in accordance with that ( Commandment ) which Allah has sent down in it . And he who does not judge ( and run the state ) complying with the commandments Allah has revealed , it is they who are unruly and wicked .
And , ( O Most Esteemed Messenger , ) We have revealed the Book to you ( also ) with the Truth which confirms the Book that preceded it and stands as a guardian over ( the actual commands and contents contained in ) it . So judge between them according to these ( Commandments ) which Allah has revealed . And do not follow their desires turning away from the Truth that has come to you . We have designed for each one of you a discrete law and an all - embracing way of life . Had Allah so willed , He would have made you all one Umma ( [ Community ] agreeing to the same law ) . But He wants to test you in these ( separately given sets of Commandments ) which He has given you ( suiting your respective life situations ) . So , make haste in doing pious works . To Allah have you all to return . He will then enlighten you on ( the Truth and falsehood in all the matters ) in which you used to disagree .
And , ( O Beloved , We have enjoined that ) you should judge between them by this ( Commandment ) which Allah has revealed and do not follow their desires . And be on your guard against them lest they tempt you away from any of ( the commandments ) which Allah has revealed to you . But if they turn away ( from your judgment ) then know that Allah intends to punish them for some of their sins . And most of the people are unruly and disobedient .
Do they seek the law of ( the days of ) ignorance ? And who is better than Allah in ( giving ) judgment for a people who have firm faith ?
O Believers ! Do not make friends with the Jews and the Christians . They ( all ) are friends to one another ( against you ) . And whoever of you makes friends with them will ( also ) become one of them . Surely Allah does not guide the wrongdoing people .
So you will see those whose hearts are diseased ( with hypocrisy and minds infected with slavery ) that they run to ( join the Jews and the Christians and ) say : We fear lest the wheel of fate turns against us ( i . e . it is likely to get under the security umbrella by allying with them ) . But it is not far from possible that Allah ( really ) blesses ( the Muslims ) with victory or may ( send ) from His side a decree ( as a sign of success and victory ) . Then they will feel ashamed of ( the hypocritical thinking ) they have concealed in their hearts .
And ( at that time ) the believers will say : Is it they who swore by Allah ( by way of ) solemn oaths that they were certainly with you ( alone ) ? ( But ) all their deeds have gone void . So they have become the losers .
O Believers ! Whoever of you turns away from his Din ( Religion ) , Allah will soon bring ( in their place ) a people He will ( Himself ) love and who will love Him . They will be kind ( and humble ) towards the believers ( but ) strict ( and firm ) towards the disbelievers . They will toil ( very hard ) in the way of Allah and will never fear any reproaches of the reprovers . This ( revolutionary character ) is the Grace of Allah which He grants whom He wills , and Allah is Infinite , All - Knowing .
Indeed your ( helper ) friend is only Allah and His Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) and the believers ( as well ) who persevere in offering Prayer and pay Zakat ( the Alms - due ) and they are those who prostrate themselves ( with extreme submissiveness before the Presence of Allah ) .
And the one who makes friends with Allah and His Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) and the believers then ( they are the people who are Allahs party ) , and ( it is the people of ) Allahs party who will surely overmaster .
O Believers ! Do not take those for friends who have made fun and sport of your Din ( Religion ) from among those who were given the Book before you and the disbelievers . And fear Allah persistently if you are ( truly ) the men of faith .
And when you call ( the people ) to Prayer ( by means of the Adhan the call to Prayer ) , these ( people ) take it as fun and sport because they are a people who have no sense ( at all ) .
( O Esteemed Messenger ! ) Say : O People of the Book ! What has made you cynic about us except that we believe in Allah and this ( Book ) which has been revealed to us and those ( Books ) which have been sent down before it ? And surely the majority of you are defiant and disobedient .
Say : Shall I apprise you of him who , in the matter of punishment , is worse in the sight of Allah than ( the one you regard the most despised ? And it is he ) whom Allah has cursed , whom He has shown His wrath , and He has transformed ( some ) of these ( evil people ) into apes and ( others into ) swines ; and ( he is such a person ) as has ( obeyed and ) worshipped Satan . They are the people who are the most wretched as for their dwelling , and far more astray from the straight path .
And when those ( hypocrites ) come to you , they say : We have believed , while they entered ( your company ) with disbelief and left with the same ( disbelief ) . And Allah knows best ( the matters ) which they carry hidden .
And you will see the majority of them hurrying towards sins and excesses and eagerly devouring what is forbidden ( and unlawful ) . Most evil indeed is all that they are doing .
Why do the divines ( spiritual masters ) and rabbis abstain from forbidding them from their sinful speech and eating unlawful things ? Certainly what all they are contriving ( by abstaining from raising voices against evil ) is most heinous .
And the Jews say : Allahs hand is tied up ( as if God forbid ! He is niggardly ) . Tied up be their ( own ) hands and they have been cursed for what they have uttered ! ( The truth is that ) both His hands are stretched out wide open ( in showering His bounties and blessings ) . He spends ( i . e . bestows His blessings on His servants ) as He desires . And , ( O Beloved , ) the ( Book ) which has been revealed to you from your Lord will certainly bolster up most of them in rebellion and disbelief ( due to jealousy ) . And We have put among them hostility and spite till the Day of Resurrection . Whenever these people kindle the fire of war , Allah puts it out . And they are engaged in spreading mischief and disorder ( everywhere ) on the earth and Allah does not like those who spread mischief .
And if the People of the Book had believed ( in Muhammad , the Messenger , [ blessing and peace be upon him ] ) and adopted Godwariness , We would have removed all their sins ( from their record ) , and would surely have admitted them to the blissful Gardens .
And had they established ( their systems by enforcing ) the Torah and the Injil ( the Gospel ) and whatever ( more ) was sent down to them from their Lord , they would have ( been provided with the material resources so abundantly that they would have ) received sustenance from above and from beneath their feet ( as well , but the sustenance would never have exhausted ) . A section among them are moderate ( i . e . they like the middle way ) , but what most of them are doing is extreme wickedness .
O ( Esteemed ) Messenger ! Communicate ( to the people all ) that has been revealed to you from your Lord . And if you did not do ( so ) then you would not deliver the Message of the Lord . And Allah will ( Himself ) protect your ( life ) from the ( hostile ) people . Surely Allah does not show the path of guidance to those who disbelieve .
Say : O People of the Book , you are nowhere ( on the path of Din [ Religion ] ) until you establish ( the system by enforcing ) the Torah and the Injil ( the Gospel ) and whatever has been sent down to you from your Lord . And , ( O Beloved , ) the Book which has been sent down to you from your Lord will certainly provoke rebellion and disbelief among most of them ( because of jealousy ) . So do not grieve over ( the state of affairs of ) the disbelievers .
Indeed ( those who call themselves ) the Muslims , the Jews , the Sabeans ( worshippers of stars ) and the Christians , all who believe ( true - heartedly in accordance with the teachings of Muhammad [ blessings and peace be upon him ] ) in Allah and the Last Day , and practise piety steadfastly shall have neither any fear nor grief .
Surely We took promise from the Children of Israel ( too ) and ( also ) sent ( many ) Messengers towards them ( but ) every time a Messenger brought to them a commandment which their ( ill - commanding ) selves disliked , they belied a party ( of the Messengers ) and slew the other ( in succession ) .
And ( besides ) they held the view that ( killing or belying the Messengers ) would not result into any torment . So they became blind and deaf . Allah , then , accepted their repentance . But most of them ( again ) turned blind and deaf ( i . e . incapable of perceiving the truth by seeing and hearing ) . And Allah is Ever Watchful of what they are doing .
In fact they have become disbelievers who say : Allah is the Messiah , son of Maryam ( Mary ) , whereas the Messiah ( himself ) said : O Children of Israel ! Worship Allah Who is my ( as well as ) your Lord . Indeed Allah has forbidden Paradise to him who associates partners with Him . And Hell is his abode and the wrongdoers will not find any helpers .
Certainly they ( also ) become disbelievers who say : Allah is the third of the three ( Gods ) , whereas there is none worthy of worship except the One God . If they do not desist from ( the absurdity ) which they utter , a grievous punishment will surely torment those of them who disbelieve .
Will they not turn towards Allah ( in repentance ) and beg forgiveness from Him ? For Allah is Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
The Messiah , son of Maryam ( Mary ) , is ( nothing ) but a Messenger ( neither a god nor a son of God , and nor His partner ) . Many Messengers have indeed preceded him and his mother was a paragon of truth ( saintly person ) . Both ( were mortal creatures as they ) used to eat food . ( O Beloved ! ) Observe how clearly We explain the Revelations for their ( guidance ) but again observe how ( in spite of that ) they are turning away ( from the Truth ) .
Say : Do you worship besides Allah someone that has no power to do you any harm or good ? Allah is the One Who is All - Hearing , All - Knowing .
Say : O People of the Book ! Do not unjustly exceed limits in your Din ( Religion ) , nor follow the desires of those who lost the straight path ( before Muhammads Prophethood [ blessings and peace be upon him ] ) and ( also ) caused a number of ( others ) to go astray and remained deviated from the straight road ( even after Muhammads Prophethood [ blessings and peace be upon him ] ) .
Those among the Children of Israel who disbelieved were cursed by the tongue of Dawud ( David ) and Isa , son of Maryam ( Jesus son of Mary ) . That is because they disobeyed and transgressed .
( And they were cursed also because ) they would not prevent one another from the evil deeds they used to do . Evil certainly were the deeds that they used to do .
You will see most of them befriending the disbelievers . How evil that is which they have sent forward for their ( accountability on the Last Day ) and ( that is ) that Allah is ( highly ) displeased with them and they will suffer from the torment forever !
And had they believed in Allah and the ( Last ) Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) and the ( Book ) that has been revealed to him , they would not have made friends with those ( enemies of Islam ) . But most of them are disobedient .
You will indeed find the Jews and the polytheists the bitterest of people in their enmity against the Muslims , and the closest in love and affection for the Muslims you will find those who say : Indeed we are Nazarenes ( Christians ) . This is because among them are savants ( i . e . scholars of Sharia ) as well as monks ( i . e . ascetic worshippers ) and ( moreover ) they are not given to arrogance .
And ( that is the reason ) when ( some of the true Christians ) listen to this ( Holy Quran ) which has been revealed to the Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) , you see their eyes overflowing with tears . ( This overflowing of tears ) springs from the Truth of which they have ( gained ) gnosis . ( Besides ) they submit : O our Lord ! We have believed ( in the Truth which You have revealed ) , so inscribe us ( also ) among those who bear witness ( to the Truth ) .
And what is the matter with us that we should not believe in Allah and the Truth ( i . e . Muhammad [ blessings and peace be upon him ] and the Holy Quran ) which has come to us , while we ( too ) cherish ( this ) strong ambition that our Lord admit us ( to His Mercy and Paradise ) along with the most pious ?
So Allah rewarded them with Gardens , with streams flowing under them , in recompense of the submission they made ( like a true believer . They ) will live there forever and that is the wage of the righteous .
But those who disbelieve and belie Our Revelations , it is they who are ( the inmates ) of Hell .
O Believers ! Do not make ( for yourselves ) unlawful those pure things which Allah has made lawful for you and do not exceed limits either . Indeed Allah does not like those who transgress the prescribed bounds .
And eat of the pure and lawful things which Allah has provided for you with and always fear Allah Whom you believe in .
Allah does not persecute you for your purposeless ( and frivolous ) oaths , but takes you to task for your ( solemn ) oaths which you affirm ( deliberately ) . ( If you breach such oaths ) the atonement is feeding ten poor persons with an average ( quality ) food which you serve to your family , or providing them ( i . e . the poor ) with the clothes , or freeing one neck ( a slave or slave girl ) . But the one who does not find ( all this ) shall fast for three days . This is the atonement for your oaths which you affirm ( and then break ) . So , always guard your oaths . It is this way Allah explains most clearly His Revelations to you so that you may become grateful ( by obeying His Commandments ) .
O Believers ! Wine and gambling and idols mounted ( for worship ) and divining arrows ( for seeking luck , all ) are filthy works of Satan . So turn away from them ( completely ) so that you may prosper .
Satan seeks only to breed enmity and spite among you by means of wine and gambling and hinder you from remembering Allah and observing Prayer . Will you abstain ( from these evil - generating temptations ) ?
And obey Allah and obey the Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) and be on your guard ( against opposition to Allah and the Messenger [ blessings and peace be upon him ] ) . But if you turn away , then you should know that the responsibility of Our Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) is only to deliver ( the commandments ) clearly ( and he has accomplished this duty . )
There is no sin on those who believe and do righteous deeds with regard to what they have eaten ( of the unlawful things before the Command of Prohibitions came ) , whereas ( in all other matters ) they were Godwary and put firm faith ( in other Commandments of Allah ) , and practised pious deeds consistently . Later , ( also after the Revelation of the Prohibitions , ) they desisted from ( all the unlawful things ) and believed ( true - heartedly in their unlawfulness ) , became men of piety and God - wariness and ( finally ) rose to the station of men of Spiritual Excellence ( i . e . Allahs beloved , favourite , intimate and righteous servants ) . And Allah loves those who live with spiritual excellence .
O Believers ! Allah will certainly test you by means of ( some ) game animals your hands and your lances can reach so that Allah makes him identifiable who fears Him in secret . Then whoever transgresses ( even ) after that , for him is painful chastisement .
O Believers ! Do not kill game while you are in Pilgrim attire ( Ihram ) . Whoever of you ( Pilgrim - clad ) kills it intentionally will recompense ( it ) in kind of cattle equivalent to the one he has killed . In this regard , two men of probity out of you are to judge ( whether this animal is really the games equal , provided ) that offering is to be brought to the Kaba . Or its atonement is feeding a few indigent persons ( i . e . usual food for the number of poor people manageable in the animals cost ) , or fasting corresponding to that ( number of days manageable within the same food meant for the poor , ) so that he tastes the ( gravity ) of his offence . Allah has forgiven whatever has bygone earlier ( to it ) , but whoever repeats ( a similar act ) Allah will avenge ( his defiance ) . And Allah is Mighty , the Lord of Retribution .
The game of the sea and its eating has been made lawful for your and the travellers benefit , but the game of the land has been prohibited for you so long as you are in the Pilgrim dress ( Ihram ) . And always fear Allah towards Whose ( Presence ) you ( all ) will be assembled .
Allah has made the Kaba , the sacred ( and venerable ) House , a means to keep ( peace in the spiritual and worldly matters of ) the people . And also the Sacred Month , the animals of offerings to the Holy Kaba and the animals with collars symbolic of sacrifice around their necks ( brought into the sacred confines of Makka , all have been granted sanctity and veneration by virtue of the same affinity ) ; that is to make you know that Allah has best knowledge of whatever there is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth , and Allah is Well - Aware of everything .
Know that Allah is Severe in Punishment and that Allah is Most Forgiving and Ever - Merciful ( as well ) .
The Messenger [ blessings and peace be upon him ] has ( no other responsibility ) but to communicate ( the Revealed Commands with absolute perfection ) . And Allah knows ( all ) that you make known and that you hide .
Say : ( Both ) the pure and the impure can never be alike , ( O listener , ) even though the abundance of the polluted and foul ( objects ) may fascinate you . So , ( instead of monitoring the difference of abundance and scarcity ) fear Allah , O men of wisdom , so that you may flourish and prosper .
O Believers ! Do not ask about things ( on which the Quran is quiet , ) for if they are disclosed to you , they may put you in strain ( and you will be disgusted by them ) . But if you enquire about them while the Quran is being sent down , they will be disclosed to you ( i . e . fixated through revealing the Commandments , but this will put an end to your choice of discretion , binding you only to one Command ) . Allah has ( so far ) overlooked ( these matters and questions ) , and Allah is Most Forgiving , Most Forbearing .
No doubt a people before you asked about similar things but ( when they were disclosed to them ) they denied them .
Allah has not made ( lawful in the Sharia a cattle dedicated to idols ) , such as a Bahira , a Saiba , a Wasila or a Ham . But the disbelievers fabricate lies against Allah and most of them do not have sense .
And when it is said to them : Turn towards this ( Quran ) revealed by Allah and towards the ( most venerable ) Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) , they say : Sufficient for us is ( the way ) on which we found our fathers , though their fathers did not have any knowledge ( of Din [ Religion ] ) , nor were they rightly guided .
O Believers ! Take care of your own selves . No one who goes astray can do you harm provided you have become rightly guided . All of you have to return to Allah alone . He will then apprise you of ( the works ) that you used to do .
O Believers ! When death approaches anyone of you , then at the time of making a bequest there should be two men of probity from amongst you ( for ) taking testimony or ( any ) two men from among others if you are travelling in the land . If ( in the meanwhile ) the agony of death overtakes you , detain both of them after Prayer . If you suspect ( them ) they shall both swear by Allah : We shall not sell it for any price , even though one is a ( very close ) relative , nor shall we conceal the testimony ( ordained ) by Allah . ( If we hide it , ) we shall be among sinners there and then .
But if it is learnt later that both of them have earned sin ( owing to concealing the true witness ) , then , in their stead , two other ( witnesses ) should rise from among those whose right the two former ( witnesses ) have seized . ( Let them both be closer relatives of the deceased . ) They should then swear by Allah : Indeed our testimony is truer than the testimony of both of them ; we are not transgressing the bounds ( of Truth ) . ( If we do so ) we shall be among the wrongdoers there and then .
This ( method ) is closer to the mode of making people give their evidence true to facts , or they feel afraid that ( in the case of false testimony , ) following their oaths , ( equally solemn ) oaths will be turned ( towards nearer heirs ) . So fear Allah with perseverance and always listen ( to the Commandments of Allah attentively ) . And Allah does not guide the people who disobey and defy .
( Fear the Day ) when Allah will assemble all the Messengers and ask ( them ) : What response were you served ( by your respective Communities following your call for Din [ Religion ] ) ? They will ( submit their ) reply ( to their Lord ) : We have no knowledge . It is certainly You Who know all the unseen full well .
When Allah will say : O Isa son of Maryam ( Jesus son of Mary ) , call to mind My Favour to you and your mother when I provided you strength through the Holy Spirit ( Gabriel ) ; you conversed with the people ( in a uniform style both ) from the cradle ( during early childhood ) and in the ripe age ( while preaching as a Messenger ) ; and when I taught you the Book , and wisdom ( and insight ) and the Torah and the Injil ( the Gospel ) ; and when by My Command you made out of clay some ( figure ) looking like a bird , then you would breathe into it and by My Command it would become a bird ; and when you made the born blind and the leper ( i . e . victims of leprosy ) convalesce by My Command ; and when you raised up the dead ( standing , bringing them back to life from the grave ) by My Command ; and when I held back the Children of Israel from ( killing ) you while you brought them clear Sings , those who disbelieved among them said : This is nothing but sheer magic .
And when I imbued the hearts of the disciples with ( this ) : Believe in Me and My Messenger ( Isa [ Jesus ] ) , they said : We believe and bear witness that we are certainly Muslims .
And ( also recall ) when the disciples said : Isa son of Maryam ( Jesus son of Mary ) , is it possible for your Lord to send down to us from heaven a table ( spread with food ) ? Isa ( Jesus ) said ( in reply ) : ( O people , ) fear Allah if you are illumined with faith .
They said : We seek ( only ) to eat of it so that our hearts are satiated and we know ( with added certitude ) that you have told us the Truth and we bear witness ( to the descent of the table ) .
Isa son of Maryam ( Jesus son of Mary ) said : O Allah , our Lord , send down to us from heaven the table spread ( with bounties ) so that ( the day of its descent ) becomes ( Id ) Festival Day for us , and for our predecessors ( as well as ) successors , and that ( spread table ) comes as a Sign from You , and provide us with sustenance , and You are the Best Sustainer .
Allah said : I certainly send it down to you , but whoever of you disbelieves ( after that ) I shall punish him with a torment such as I will never inflict on anyone else in all the worlds .
And when Allah will say : O Isa son of Maryam ( Jesus son of Mary ) ! Did you ask the people to take you and your mother as two gods besides Allah ? He will submit : Glory be to You ! It is not ( justified ) for me to say such a thing as I have no right to say . Had I said it You would surely have known it . You know every such ( thing ) that is in my heart , but I do not know those ( things ) which are in Your knowledge . It is only You indeed Who Know Well all that is unseen .
I said to them nothing except ( that ) which You ordered me to say : Worship ( only ) Allah Who is my Lord and your Lord ( too ) . And I kept a vigilant watch over ( their beliefs and actions ) so long as I was among them . But when You lifted me up then You alone watched over their ( affairs ) , and You are a Witness to everything .
If You torment them , they are only Your servants and if You forgive them , You are indeed Almighty , All - Wise .
Allah will say : This is the Day ( when ) the truth of the truthful will benefit them . There are Gardens for them with streams flowing beneath ; they shall live therein forever . Allah is pleased with them and they are pleased with Him . This ( pleasure of Allah ) is the highest achievement .
To Allah belongs the kingdom of all the heavens and the earth and whatever lies in them , and He wields full power over everything .
All praise belongs to Allah alone Who created the heavens and the earth and produced darkness and light ; yet the disbelievers set up ( false gods as ) equals to their Lord .
( Allah ) is He Who created you from mud ( i . e . originated from it chemical genesis of human life on the planet Earth ) . Then He fixed a term ( for you to die ) . And with Him alone is the appointed time ( for holding the Day of Resurrection ) ; yet you doubt .
And He alone is Allah ( the True God to be worshipped ) in the heavens and the earth Who knows ( all ) your hidden and your open ( things ) . And He knows ( that too ) which you are earning .
And there comes to them no Sign of the Signs of their Lord but ( that ) they turn away from it .
Then indeed ( the same way ) they belied the Truth ( the Quran as well ) when it came to them ( as a Sign of Allah ) . But soon there is coming to them the news pertaining to what they have been making fun of .
Have they not seen how many a generation We eliminated before them whom We had given ( such an indomitable ) dominion ( and stronghold ) in the land as We have not given even to you ? And We sent upon them persistently falling rain and caused streams to flow beneath ( their dwellings and castles ) . Then , ( despite giving them such a luxurious life , ) We destroyed them because of their sins and raised other communities after them .
And had We revealed to you a book written on paper which these people could also have touched with their own hands , ( even ) then the disbelievers would have said : This is ( nothing ) but sheer magic .
And these ( disbelievers ) say : Why was an angel ( whom we could physically see and who would verify him ) not sent down to this ( Glorious Messenger ) ? Had We sent down an angel , ( their ) affair would have been settled once for all and they would not have been granted ( any ) respite .
And if We had made the Messenger an angel , even then We would have made him ( the form of ) a man , and ( even in that case , ) We would have put them in the same doubt which they are ( already ) in ( i . e . confused over his physical appearance , they would say : He is a human being like us . ) .
Indeed before you ( too ) the Messengers were laughed at , but then the same ( torment of the Truth ) which they ridiculed besieged those of them who ridiculed .
Say : Travel through the earth and see ( with a warned eye ) what has been the end of those who denied ( the Truth ) .
Ask ( them this question ) : To whom belongs whatever is in the heavens and the earth ? And ( then ) proclaim ( this as well ) : Allahs it is . He has made Mercy incumbent upon Himself ( as a gracious obligation ) . He will gather you together on the Day of Resurrection about which there is no doubt . Those who have brought ( eternal ) loss upon their souls will not believe .
And to Him belongs ( all the creation ) that reposes at night and during the day . And He is All - Hearing , All - Knowing .
Say : Shall I take ( for worship ) anyone as ( my ) friend other than Allah , Who is the Creator of the heavens and the earth , and He feeds ( all ) and is not fed ( Himself ) ? Say : I have been commanded to become the first Muslim ( who bows his head before His Holy Presence ) and ( this too has been commanded , ) never to be one of the polytheists .
Say : Surely , I fear the Day of a mighty torment if I disobey my Lord . ( How is it possible ? )
He from whom that ( torment ) is averted that Day shall have been shown great Mercy ( by Allah ) . And it is this ( deliverance on the Last Day ) which is an evident success .
If Allah afflicts you with some suffering there is none who can remove it but He , and if He bestows some good upon you , then He wields full power over everything .
And He is the One Who is Dominant over His servants and He is All - Wise , All - Knowing .
Inquire ( of them ) : Who is the greatest to bear testimony ? Proclaim ( yourself ) : Allah is witness between you and me . This Holy Quran has been revealed to me so that with it I may warn you as well as every such person this ( Quran ) may reach . Do you really bear witness that there are ( also ) gods other than Allah ? Say : I do not bear witness ( to such a wrong thing ) . Reiterate : God is but He the Only One and I despise ( all ) these objects you associate ( with Allah ) .
Those to whom We have given the Book recognize this ( last of the Messengers ) as they recognize their sons . They are those who have brought ( eternal ) loss upon their souls , but they will not believe .
And who can be a greater wrongdoer than one who invents a lie against Allah or who belies His Revelations ? Surely the wrongdoers shall not prosper .
And the Day when We shall assemble them all together and ask those who used to associate partners with Us : Where are your partners you assumed ( to be your gods ) ?
Then they will be left with no other excuse except that they ( will ) say : By Allah , our Lord , we did not associate partners with Allah .
See how they lie against their own selves and the blame they used to fabricate ( in the world ) has vanished from them !
And among them are ( also ) some who keep their ears towards you and ( in view of their evil intentions ) We have wrapped their hearts in veils . ( So , it is not possible for them now ) that they may understand it ( the Quran ) and ( We have ) plugged their ears . And even if they see all Signs ( naked ) , they ( still ) will not believe in them , so much so that when they approach you and quarrel with you the disbelievers say ( at that time ) : This ( Quran ) is nothing but fabricated stories of the old folk .
And they hinder ( others from following ) this ( Messenger and the Quran ) and ( also themselves ) flee far away from it . They ruin but their own souls and have no awareness ( of this destruction at all ) .
If you see ( them at the time ) when they will be made to stand ( on the verge of ) the Fire they will say : Would that we were sent back ( to the world ) , then we would not ( at all ) belie the Signs of our Lord and would be of the believers !
( This affirmation contains no truth . ) In fact whatever they used to hide before ( all that ) has become visible to them . And ( even ) if they were sent back ( to the world ) they would ( once again ) do the same that they had been forbidden . And undoubtedly they are ( seasoned ) liars .
And they will keep saying ( what they said before ) : There is no other ( life ) except the life of this world , nor shall we be raised up ( after death ) .
If you see ( them at the time ) when they will be made to stand before their Lord and Allah will say ( to them ) : Is not this ( life ) a truth ? They will submit : Yes , of course , by our Lord ( it is the Truth ) . Allah will ( then ) say : So ( now ) taste the torment because you used to disbelieve .
So those who belie their meeting with Allah incur loss , so much so that when the Last Hour comes upon them all of a sudden they will say : Oh , woe to us ! We committed a ( serious ) blunder with regard to ( believing in ) this ( Day of Resurrection ) . And they will be carrying the burdens ( of their sins ) on their backs . Beware ! Most evil is that burden which they are bearing .
( The luxury ) of the worldly life is nothing but play and funfair , and certainly it is the home of the Hereafter which is better for the Godfearing . Do you not understand ( this reality ) ?
( O Beloved ! ) We assuredly know that ( what ) they say grieves you . So they are not denying you but ( in fact ) it is the Revelations of Allah that the wrongdoers are denying .
And indeed ( many ) Messengers were rejected before you ( as well ) , but they remained steadfast facing this rejection and persecution until Our help reached them . And there is none that can alter the Words ( promises ) of Allah . And surely the accounts of the Messengers have come to you ( for peace of heart ) .
And if their disinclination and turning away is distressing you ( and you ardently desire them to believe in any case ) then , if possible , manage a tunnel , ( going down ) into the earth , or seek some ladder , ( climbing up ) to heaven , and bring them some ( exceptional ) Sign ( to show them , even then they will not believe ) . And if Allah so willed , He would indeed assemble them together on guidance . So ( owing to the overwhelming enthusiasm generating from your compassion , kindness and concern ) be not unaware ( of their ill fortune ) .
The truth is that they alone accept ( the invitation of Truth ) who listen to it ( with truthful hearts ) . And Allah will raise the dead ( the deniers of the truth from the graves as disbelievers ) . Then , they will be returned to the same ( Lord Whom they used to deny ) .
And they said : Why has a ( permanent ) Sign not been sent down to this ( Messenger [ blessings and peace be upon him ] ) from his Lord ? Say : Allah assuredly has the power to send down ( such a ) Sign but most of them do not know ( the secrets of His wisdom ) .
And , ( O mankind ! ) there is no moving ( animal ) on the earth nor a bird that flies on its two wings but ( such ) that they are species like you [ umamun amthalu - kum in several traits ] . We have not omitted anything ( which is not given symbolic or elaborate details ) in the Book . Then all ( the people ) shall be gathered before their Lord .
Those who reject Our Revelations are deaf and dumb , ( groping ) in the folds of darkness . Allah holds astray whom He wills ( due to his stubbornness and the denial of the Truth ) , and puts whom He pleases on the straight road ( due to the acceptance of the Truth ) .
Say ( to these disbelievers ) : Give your view : if Allahs torment befalls you or the Last Hour comes upon you , will you then call upon anyone other than Allah ( to escape the torment ? Reply ) if you are truthful .
( Nay , that is not possible at all . ) The truth is that it is ( Allah ) Whom you call upon ( even now ) . Then , if He wills He averts those ( hardships ) for which you call upon ( Him ) . ( At that time ) you forget those ( idols ) that you associate as partners ( with Allah ) .
Indeed We sent Messengers to many communities before you . Then We seized them with scarcity and distress ( due to their disobedience and defiance ) , so that they might beseech ( with submissiveness and humility ) .
Then why did they not humble themselves and wail and moan when Our torment came upon them ? But ( the fact is that ) their hearts became hardened and Satan made the ( sinful ) acts appear to them attractive and alluring that they used to perpetrate .
But when they forgot that Reminder which was urged upon them We opened up for them the gates ( to abundance ) of everything ( to take them to their end ) until when they luxuriated ( in ecstasy of sensual delights and sensuous gratification ) with all that was provided for them We seized them all of a sudden ( with torment ) and they were struck with despair .
So the root of the wrongdoing and unjust people was cut off . And all praise belongs to Allah alone Who is the Sustainer of all the worlds .
Say ( to them ) : What do you think if Allah deprives you of hearing and sight and seals up your hearts , ( then ) who is the god other than Allah who can restore to you these ( blessings afresh ) ? Look how diversely We explain Our Revelations . Yet they continue turning away .
( Also ) say ( to them ) : Tell me if the punishment of Allah comes upon you all of a sudden or openly , will ( any other ) be destroyed except those who do injustice ?
And We do not send Messengers but as Bearers of glad tidings and as Warners . So whoever believes and changes into a righteous person ( practically ) , they will have nothing to fear , nor will they grieve .
But those who belie Our Revelations , torment is bound to befall them because they used to disobey .
Say ( to these disbelievers ) : I do not say to you that I possess the treasures of Allah , nor do I know the unseen myself , and nor do I say to you that I am an angel . I follow only that ( Commandment ) which is revealed to me . Say : Can the blind and the seeing be equal ? So do you not ponder ?
And warn by means of this ( Quran ) those who fear that they will be assembled before their Lord while they are without ( any ) helper or intercessor apart from Him so that they may become pious .
And do not turn away these ( run - down and broken - hearted ) people ( from your company and close circle ) who call upon their Lord persistently seeking only His pleasure morning and evening . There is nothing ( obligatory ) either on you from their account ( of deeds and rewards ) or upon them from your account . Even then if you turned them away ( from your munificence and benevolence ) , you would be of those who deprive others of their rights ( which does not go with your glory ) .
And in this way We put to test some of them by means of some others so that these ( affluent disbelievers seeing the poor Muslims ) say ( mocking ) : Are these the ones from amongst us upon whom Allah has bestowed His Favours ? Does Allah not know best the grateful ?
And when those who believe in Our Revelations come to you , then say ( affectionately ) : Peace be upon you . Your Lord has made Mercy incumbent upon Himself ( as a gracious obligation ) . So whoever from amongst you commits some evil out of ignorance ( or suspension of discretion ) but later turns to ( Allah in ) repentance and amends ( himself ) , then surely He is Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
And so do We elucidate in detail the Revelations ( and this is ) in order that the pattern of behaviour of the evildoers may become distinctly known ( to all ) .
Say : I am forbidden to worship those ( false gods ) that you worship apart from Allah . Say : I cannot follow your desires , for if I did I would certainly lose the right path . Nor shall I be one of the rightly guided ( which is impossible ) .
Say : ( O disbelievers ! ) Verily , I stand ( firm ) on the enlightening proof from my Lord and you treat it as false . I do not have that ( chastisement ) which you seek in haste . The command rests only with Allah . He relates the Truth and He is the Best Judge .
Say ( to them ) : Had I had that ( torment ) which you desire to have in haste then certainly the matter between me and you would have been settled once for all . And Allah knows the unjust full well .
With Him ( under His control and possession ) are the keys of the unseen ( i . e . the ways and means by which the unseen is disclosed to someone ) ; no one ( by ones own effort ) knows them but He . And He knows ( directly ) whatever is in the land and in the sea . And not a leaf falls but He knows it . There is not a grain in the folds of the earths darkness , nor anything green or dry but ( has been recorded ) in the enlightening Book .
And He is the One Who takes your souls by night and knows whatever you earn by day , and then wakes you up in the day , so that the appointed term ( of your life ) may be completed . Then to Him shall you return . Then ( on the Day of Reckoning ) He shall unfold to you ( all those actions ) which you used to do ( during this term of life ) .
And He has dominance over His servants and He sends to you ( angels as ) guardians until when death approaches anyone of you ( then the angels ) We send take his soul and they do not err ( or default ) .
Then they ( all ) will be returned to the Presence of Allah , their true Lord . Beware ! It is only His ( prerogative ) to decree . And He is the Quickest in taking the account .
Inquire of them : Who delivers you from the layers of the darkness of the land and the sea ? When ( in trouble , ) you supplicate Him totally prostrated and ( also ) in secret : If He delivers us from that ( adversity ) we shall surely be among the grateful .
Say : It is Allah Who rescues you from this ( adversity ) and every other distress . Yet you associate partners with Him .
Say : He has the power to send to you the torment ( may it be ) from above you or from underneath your feet , or engage you in strife by splitting you into sects and make you taste the violence of one against the other . See in what diverse ways We elucidate the Revelations , so that they may comprehend .
And your people have rejected this ( Quran ) as false whereas it is the Absolute Truth . Say : I am not a guardian over you .
Every news has a fixed time ( to occur ) and soon will you come to know .
When you see those who engage themselves in ( vain discourse and making a jest of ) Our Revelations keep away from them till they get busy with some other subject of conversation . But if Satan makes you forget ( it ) , then never ( ever ) sit with the unjust people after it strikes your mind .
And there is nothing ( obligatory ) upon the Godfearing from the account of these ( disbelievers ) , but they ( should ) admonish them so that they may be protected ( from disbelief and mocking the Quran ) .
And let them be forsaken who have made their own Din ( Religion ) a sport and pastime and who have been deceived by the worldly life . And continue to exhort them ( for their awareness ) by means of the ( Quran ) , so that no soul gets consigned to ruination as a result of its doings . ( Then ) will there be neither any helper nor any intercessor for him apart from Allah . And even if that ( soul ) atones ( for its sins ) full recompense ( i . e . ransom ) , that will not be accepted from it ( at all ) . It is they who are destroyed in consequence of their doings . For them is drinking of scalding water and a torturous torment because they used to reject faith .
Say : Should we worship besides Allah something that can neither bring us any profit nor do us any harm , and turn on our heels after Allah has blessed us with guidance , like the one satans have persuaded away from the right path into bewilderment in the land , whose companions are calling on him to the straight path : Come to us , ( but he can perceive nothing ) . Proclaim : The guidance of Allah is the only ( true ) guidance , and ( that is why ) we have been commanded to submit totally to the Lord of all the worlds .
And this ( has also been commanded : ) Establish Prayer and always fear Him , and Allah is He to Whom you ( all ) shall be gathered .
And He is the One ( Allah ) Who has created the heavens and the earth ( in accordance with the zero - defect strategy based ) on Truth . And the Day when He will say : Be , then that ( Day of Judgment ) will come into being . His Word is the Truth . His will be the Sovereignty on the Day when the Trumpet will be blown ( by Israfil ) . He ( is the One Who ) has the knowledge of the unseen and the seen , and He is All - Wise , All - Aware .
And call to mind when Ibrahim ( Abraham ) said to his father Azar ( he was in fact his uncle ; he is called father according to the Arabic usage ) : Do you take the idols as gods ? Indeed I find you and your people ( engaged ) in manifest error .
And in the same way We showed Ibrahim ( Abraham ) all the kingdoms of the heavens and the earth ( i . e . the wonders of Our creation ) so that he might be one of those who possess the eye of certitude .
So when the night spread its darkness over him he beheld ( a ) star and said : Is this my Lord ( according to your view ) ? But when it set , he said ( communicating to his people ) : I do not like the setting ones .
Then when he saw the moon shining , he asked : Is this my Lord ( according to your view ) ? But when that ( also ) went down , he said ( communicating to his people ) : Had my Lord not guided me , I would surely have become ( like you ) one of those who go astray .
Then when he saw the sun shining , he said : Is it my Lord ( in your view because ) this is the biggest ? But when that ( too ) set , he exclaimed : O people ! I dissociate myself from ( all ) those ( objects ) that you associate ( with Allah ) as His partners .
I have indeed turned my face single - mindedly ( from all sides ) towards that ( Being ) Who has created the heavens and the earth beyond compare and ( beware : ) I am not from among the polytheists .
And his people started disputing and contending with him . ( Then ) he said : Do you dispute with me about Allah Who He has in fact guided me aright ? And I fear not these ( false gods ) that you associate with Him except that whatever ( harm ) my Lord may will ( He can do ) . My Lord has encompassed everything with ( His ) knowledge . So , do you not accept admonition ?
And how should I fear these ( false gods ) that you associate as partners ( with Allah ) while you do not fear that you have set up ( idols as ) peers to Allah ( whereas ) He has not sent down to you any authority ( to associate ? Now reply yourselves : ) Which of the two parties then has greater right to be free from the fear ( of chastisement ) if you have knowledge ?
Those who believe and do not mix up their belief with injustice ( of polytheism ) , it is they who are entitled to peace ( i . e . fearlessness in the Hereafter ) and it is they who are blessed with guidance .
And this was Our proof ( of the Oneness of Allah ) that We imparted to Ibrahim ( Abraham ) against a people ( hostile to him ) . We exalt to higher ranks whom We please . Surely your Lord is Most Wise , All - Knowing .
And We bestowed upon him ( Ibrahim [ Abraham ] ) , Ishaq ( Isaac ) and Yaqub ( Jacob son and grandson ) and blessed all ( of them ) with guidance . ( Also ) before ( them ) We provided guidance to Nuh ( Noah ) and ( guided aright ) among his progeny Dawud ( David ) , Sulaiman ( Solomon ) and Ayyub ( Job ) and Yusuf ( Joseph ) and Musa ( Moses ) and Harun ( Aaron ) . And thus do We reward the pious .
And ( We guided also ) Zakariyya ( Zacharias ) , Yahya ( John ) and Isa ( Jesus ) and Ilyas ( Elias ) . All these were the righteous people ( blessed with His nearness and divine consciousness ) .
And ( We guided ) Ismail ( Ishmael ) , al - Yasa ( Elisha ) and Yunus ( Jonah ) and Lut ( Lot , too ) . And We exalted all of them above all the people ( of their time ) .
And also of their ancestors and descendants and their brothers ( We honoured some with similar excellence ) and We chose them ( for Our special favour and eminence ) and guided them to the straight road .
This is the guidance of Allah whereby He guides those of His servants whom He wills . But , if ( supposedly ) they had associated partners with Allah , all their ( pious ) deeds that they performed would have been seized ( i . e . become void ) .
( It is ) they whom We gave the Book and the Authority of Judgement ( Sharia ) and Prophethood . Then if these people ( i . e . the disbelievers ) deny these things , We have indeed appointed such people ( to believe in these things ) who ( will ) never deny them .
It is ( these ) people ( i . e . the Messengers of Allah ) whom Allah has granted guidance . So , ( O Last of the Messengers , ) put into your practice all their ( exalted and superior ) ways and methods ( and assimilate them into your holy personage so that all the superior traits and sublime attributes of all the Messengers of Allah collect in you ) . Say : ( O people , ) I do not ask you for any wages ( for this provision of guidance ) ; it is but an admonition for mankind .
And they ( the Jews ) did not appreciate Allah with the just estimation that is His true measure ( when they denied the Prophethood of Muhammad [ blessings and peace be upon him ] ) saying : Allah has not sent down anything to any human being . Say : Who sent down the Book which Musa ( Moses ) brought , a light and guidance for the people ? You have made them into separate paper - sheets showing it ( to the people ) and ( also ) concealing much ( of it ) . And you have been taught what neither you nor your forefathers knew . Say : ( All this is but the blessing of ) Allah . Then leave them ( in whatever plight they are ) sporting with their falsehood .
And this is ( that ) Book which We have sent down , the most blessed one . It ( authentically ) confirms those revealed Books that preceded it . And ( this ) has been ( sent down ) in order that ( firstly ) you warn the residents of the nucleus of all the ( human ) communities , Makka , and ( secondly ) the dwellers around it ( the world over ) . And only those who believe in it have faith in the Last Day , and they alone keep a vigilant watch over their Prayers .
And who is more unjust than one who invents a lie against Allah ( and making a false claim of Prophethood ) says : Revelation has been sent down to me , whereas no revelation is sent to him ? ( And who can be more unjust than one who ( making a false claim of being a god ) says : I ( too ) shall soon send down such ( a Book ) as Allah has sent ? And if you visualize ( the sight ) when the unjust will be ( suffering from ) the throes of death and angels will stretch forth their hands ( towards them demanding : ) Deliver your souls from your bodies . This day you will be recompensed with humiliating torment because you used to speak falsehood against Allah and disobey and disregard His Revelations .
And verily ( on the Day of Resurrection ) you will come to Us all alone as We created you ( all alone ) the first time , and you will leave all that behind you which We have bestowed on you ( of wealth and children ) . And We will not see your intercessors accompanying you whom you have assumed to be Our partners in your affairs . Surely ( today ) your mutual relation ( and confidence ) has broken off and ( all ) the claims that you used to make have become void .
Verily Allah alone causes the seed - grain and the fruit - stone to burst forth and sprout . He brings forth the living from the dead and the dead from the living . Such is Allah ( the Glorious ) ; then where do you stray away ?
He is the One Who cleaves through the dark of the night and causes the ( light of ) the day to burst forth . And He is the One Who has made the night for rest and the sun and the moon for reckoning and computing . This is the appointed measure of the Almighty , the All - Knowing ( Lord ) .
And He is the One Who has made for you stars so that you may navigate through all kinds of darkness of the land and the sea . Indeed We have elucidated ( Our ) Revelations in detail for those who possess knowledge .
And ( Allah ) is He Who has created you from a single soul ( i . e . a single cell ) . Then ( for you ) there ( is ) a place of residing and a place of storage ( i . e . the mothers womb and the world or the world and the grave respectively ) . Surely We have explained the Signs ( of Our Power and Might ) in detail for the people who understand .
And He is the One Who sends down water from the sky . Then by means of this ( rain ) We bring forth vegetation of every kind out of which We produce green ( foliage ) from which We bring forth clustered grain packed one over the other , clusters of date - palm hanging low from its spathe and gardens of grapes , olives and ( also ) pomegranates ( which from many aspects look ) alike but ( in products , tastes and effects ) are unlike . Look at the fruit of the tree when it bears fruit , and ( also observe ) when it ripens . Verily in these are Signs for those who believe .
And these ( disbelievers ) associate jinn as partners with Allah , whereas He is the One Who has created them . And ( also ) without knowledge ( and reason ) they falsely attribute sons and daughters to Allah . Holy is He and Exalted far above ( all ) that they attribute ( to Him ) .
He is the One Who is the Originator of the heavens and the earth . How can He have children when He has no wife ? And He is the One Who has created everything and He has the best knowledge of everything .
That is ( Allah ) your Sustainer ; none has the right to be worshipped except He . ( He is ) the Creator of everything . So worship Him alone and He is the Protector of everything .
No vision can grasp His Sight but He has encompassed all vision and eyesight . He is the All - Penetrating Viewer , All - Aware .
The Signs ( of guidance ) have indeed come to you from your Lord . So he who perceives ( them by his insight ) brings ( benefit ) to his own self , and he who remains blind ( also ) brings loss upon his own self . And I am not a guardian over you .
And it is this way We elucidate ( Our ) Verses repeatedly ( diversifying the styles ) so that they ( the disbelievers ) may exclaim : You have studied ( from somewhere ) , and that We make it clear to the people who are prone to learn .
Follow this ( Quran ) which has been revealed to you from your Lord . There is no God except Allah , and turn away from those who associate partners with Allah .
And if Allah had willed ( to prevent them forcefully ) , these people would ( never ) have set up partners with Him . And We have ( also ) not made you a guardian over them , nor are you a protector over them .
And , ( O Muslims , ) do not abuse these ( false gods ) these ( polytheists ) worship besides Allah lest these people should ( also , in retaliation , ) revile against Allahs Glory wrongfully due to ignorance . Thus have We made the conduct of every sect ( and faction ) seem attractive to ( their own eyes and they regard only that as Truth ) . Then all have to return to their Lord , and He will inform them of ( the results of ) their deeds which they used to do .
They swear their most solemn oaths by Allah that if there comes to them some ( manifest ) Sign , they shall certainly believe in that . Say ( to them ) : Signs are but with Allah alone . And , ( O Muslims , ) how would you know that when the Sign comes ( still ) they will not believe ?
( Due to their own malice ) We shall turn their hearts and their eyes away from ( accepting the Truth the same way ) as they have disbelieved ( in the Messenger [ blessings and peace be upon him ] ) the first time . ( So , they will not believe even on seeing the Sign ) . And We shall leave them to wander astray in their rebellion and defiance .
And if We sent down to them angels , and the dead started talking to them , and We gathered everything in clusters ( before their eyes ) , even then they would not believe except what Allah willed , and most of them put ignorance to work .
And the same way We made for every Prophet enemiesthe satans from among men and jinnwho always pour into one anothers hearts ( flattery and ) gilded talk ( as suspicions ) in order to deceive . And if your Lord had willed ( to prevent them forcefully ) they would not have done so . So leave them and ( also ) the falsehood which they fabricate .
And ( its ) purpose is that the hearts of the people who do not believe in the Hereafter may incline to this ( deceit ) , and that they may develop fondness for it , and ( also ) that they may begin to do ( the evil deeds ) which they are themselves ( perpetrating ) .
( Say : ) Should I look for someone other than Allah as authority ( and judge ) while He ( Allah ) is the One Who has revealed to you the elaborate Book ( comprising a clear course of action ) . And those whom We gave the Book ( before ) know ( with conviction ) that this ( Quran ) has been revealed from your Lord ( based on ) Truth . So do not be of the sceptics ( with regard to these People of the Book whether they know or not that the Quran is a revealed Book ) .
And the Word of your Lord has been perfected in truthfulness and justice . There is no one who can change His Words . And He is All - Hearing , All - Knowing .
And if you obeyed what the majority of people ( dwelling ) on earth say , they would lead you astray from the path of Allah . They simply follow assumptions and speculations ( instead of truth and certitude ) and remain engaged in mere guesswork ( and telling lies ) .
Surely your Lord alone knows best the one who strays away from His path and only He knows best the rightly guided ( as well ) .
So always eat of that ( slaughtered animal ) over which the Name of Allah has been pronounced ( at the time of slaughter ) if you believe in His Revelations .
And what is the matter with you that you do not eat of that ( meat ) over which the Name of Allah has been pronounced ( at the time of slaughter ? You regard these lawful animals as unlawful without any reason ) , while He has spelled out to you in detail ( all ) those things which He has forbidden to you except when ( under the unavoidable circumstances ) you are forced ( to eat the bare necessity just as a life - saving measure . So do not declare more things forbidden on your own anymore ) . Surely many a people , devoid of ( concrete ) learning , lead astray ( others ) consistently by means of their own lusts ( and fantasies ) . And surely your Lord knows well the transgressors .
And give up all the sins of body and of heart ( i . e . both open and secret ) . Indeed those who are earning sins will soon be punished for ( the evil works ) that they used to perpetrate .
And do not eat of ( the meat of the animal ) over which the Name of Allah has not been pronounced ( at the time of slaughter ) . Verily , it is a sin ( to eat that meat ) . And surely the devils keep pouring ( doubts ) into the hearts of their companions so that they may dispute with you . And if you follow their instructions , ( then ) you will also become polytheists .
Can he who was dead ( i . e . devoid of faith ) , then We gave him life ( by guidance ) and created for him the light ( of faith and gnosis ) , and ( now ) by means of that he walks among ( the rest of ) the people ( also to spread that light ) be like the one who is steeped in the darkness of ( ignorance and error in such a way ) that he can by no means come out of it ? Likewise , the actions disbelievers keep doing are made alluring and attractive ( in their sight ) .
And in like manner We made the lords ( and the affluent ) in every community the ringleaders of their crimes , so that they might execute frauds in that ( town ) and ( in fact ) they do not defraud anyone other than their own selves . And they are not aware ( of its evil outcome ) .
And when a Sign comes to them , they say : We shall never believe until we too are given ( a Sign ) like the one bestowed upon the Messengers of Allah . Allah knows best whom He is to assign the station of His Messengership . Soon the convicts will face humiliation before Allah and ( will undergo ) a severe torment as well because they used to defraud ( and deceive ) .
So he whom Allah intends to give guidance ( by way of bounty ) , He broadens his breast for Islam and he for whom He wills persistence in error ( which he has purchased ) He , ( by way of justice , ) tightens his breast with ( such a ) fierce constriction as if he were ascending up hard into the sky ( i . e . height ) . In the same way Allah sends torment ( of disgrace ) upon those who do not come to believe .
And this ( Islam ) is the ( only ) straight path of your Lord . Verily We have clearly explained Revelations in detail for those who accept direction and guidance .
For them is the home of peace and security with their Lord . And He is the One Who is their Protector because of the ( pious ) deeds which they used to do .
And on the Day when He gathers them all together ( He will say : ) O party of jinn ( satans ) , certainly you misguided many a human being , and their friends among mankind will say : O our Lord ! We have ( sufficiently ) benefited from each other , and ( in the same state of negligence and interest - mongering ) reached the end of the term that You had fixed for us ( but we could not make any preparation for this ) . Allah will say : ( Now ) the Fire is your abode in which you will reside forever , except what Allah may will . Verily your Lord is Most Wise , All - Knowing .
In this manner We continue making some of the oppressors dominate over others due to the ( evil ) deeds that they earn .
O community of jinn and men ! Did Messengers not come to you from among yourselves reciting My Verses to you and warning you of your appearance ( before Me ) this Day ? They will say : We bear witness against our own souls . The life of the world had caught them in deception and they will bear witness ( to this effect ) against themselves that ( in the world ) they were disbelievers ( i . e . the beliers of the Truth ) .
This ( sending of the Messengers ) was because your Lord would not destroy the towns due to injustice while the people living there were ( absolutely ) unaware ( of the teachings of the Truth i . e . no one made them acquainted with the Truth ) .
There are ranks ( determined ) for all according to their works , and your Lord is not unaware ( of the works ) they do .
And your Lord is Self - Sufficient , Lord of ( Great ) Mercy . If He wills He can eliminate you and , after you , make your successor whom He likes as He has raised you from the descendants of another people .
Indeed ( the torment ) which you are being promised has to certainly come and you cannot thwart ( Allah ) .
Say : O ( my ) people ! Keep working at your position and surely I continue working ( at my place ) . Then you shall soon come to know for whom it ends ( well ) in the Hereafter . Indeed the unjust will not be emancipated .
They have fixed for Allah a share of the same ( things ) that He has produced of crops and cattle . Then , out of their ( false ) speculation , they say : This share is for Allah and that for our ( so - called ) partners . Then ( the share ) meant for their partners does not reach Allah and that ( portion ) which is for Allah reaches their partners . What an evil judgment ( they ) are making !
And in like manner their partners have made killing of their children appear attractive to many of the idolaters in order to ruin them , and ( also ) make their ( leftover ) religion doubtful for them . And had Allah willed ( to prevent them forcefully ) they could not have done it . So leave them alone ( paying no heed to them ) and that which they fabricate .
And according to their ( heretic ) concept they ( also ) say : These ( particular ) cattle and crop are prohibited . None can eat them except the one whom we wish . ( And ) there are ( certain ) cattle whose backs are forbidden ( to ride ) . And there are ( some ) cattle on which these people do not pronounce the Name of Allah ( at the time of slaughter . All this ) amounts to fabrication against Allah . Soon He will punish them for ( that ) which they used to fabricate .
And they ( also ) say : The ( offspring ) in the wombs of these cattle is exclusively for our men but forbidden to our women and if that ( offspring ) is stillborn then they ( men and women ) all are partners in it . Soon He will punish them for their ( invented ) dogmas . He is indeed Most Wise , All - Knowing .
Certainly ruined are they who kill their children without ( true ) knowledge out of ( sheer ) foolishness , and make those ( things ) unlawful which Allah has bestowed upon them ( as sustenance ) , inventing a lie against Allah . They have certainly lost the straight path and could not be rightly guided .
And He is the One Who has produced trellised and untrellised gardens ( i . e . plants climbing up with supports and those not climbing up ) and ( also created ) date ( palms ) and vegetation with a wide variety of fruits and olive and pomegranates ( that ) resemble ( in shape ) but differ ( in taste ) . When ( these trees ) bear fruit , eat of their fruits and ( also ) give away its due ( as appointed by Allah ) on the day of harvest ( of the crop and the fruit ) and do not spend wastefully . Surely He does not like those who spend extravagantly .
And ( He ) has created ( giant - like ) cattle to carry burden and the ones lying - on - earth ( due to short height or for slaughter ) . Eat of this ( provision also by way of slaughter ) which Allah has provided for you . And do not follow in the footsteps of Satan ; certainly he is your open enemy .
( Allah ) has created eight pairs : two of the sheep ( male and female ) and two of the goat ( male and female ) . Say ( to them ) : Has He forbidden the two males or the two females or that ( offspring ) which is in the wombs of the two females ? Answer me on the basis of knowledge and reason if you are truthful ,
And two of the camel ( male and female ) and two of the cow ( male and female ) . Say ( to them ) : Has He forbidden the two males or the two females or that ( offspring ) which is in the wombs of the two females ? Were you present at the time when Allah pronounced to you this ( prohibitive ) injunction ? Then who can be more unjust than the one who fabricates a lie against Allah so that he may lead the people astray without knowledge ? Indeed Allah does not guide the unjust people .
Say : I do not find in that Revelation which has been sent to me anything forbidden to anyone who eats ( such things ) as he takes in food except carrion , or running blood , or the flesh of swine , for it is filthy and impious , or the sinfully slaughtered animal on which some name other than Allahs Name has been invoked at the time of slaughter . But he who becomes helpless ( due to hunger ) , and is neither disobeying nor transgressing , then surely your Lord is Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
And We forbade to the Jews every ( beast ) having claws , and We forbade them the fat of the cow and the goat , except that ( fat ) which coats their backs or lines their entrails , or which is attached to the bones . This We awarded them as a punishment for their rebellion . And assuredly We are Truthful .
Should they belie you then say : Your Lord is the Lord of Infinite Mercy , but His torment will not be averted from the evildoers .
Those who associate partners with Allah will soon say : Had Allah so willed , neither we nor our fathers would have committed polytheism ; nor would have we declared anything forbidden ( without authority ) . In like manner the people before them also belied until they tasted Our torment . Say : Do you have any ( authentic ) knowledge which you may bring forth for us ? ( If so , then present it ) . You ( abandoning knowledge of certitude ) follow only assumptions and speculations and tell sheer lies ( based on guesswork ) .
Say : Only Allahs is the irrefutable proof . So , if He had willed ( to force you ) He would have made all of you guidance - bound .
Say ( to these polytheists ) : Produce your witnesses who would ( come to ) testify that Allah has forbidden this . Then if at all they bear ( false ) witness , do not accept their testimony ( but instead , disclose to them their falsehood ) . Nor yield to the vain desires of those who refuse to accept Our Revelations as true and do not believe in the Hereafter and hold ( false gods as ) equal to their Lord .
Say : Come , I will recite to you those things which your Lord has forbidden to you : Do not set up anything as a partner with Him ; be morally excellent with parents ; and do not kill your children owing to poverty . We alone give you sustenance and ( will provide for ) them as well . And do not draw near to shameful deeds ( whether ) open or hidden . And do not kill the soul whose ( killing ) Allah has forbidden , except when it is rightful due ( according to Law in self - defence , against disruption and while combating terrorism ) . It is these ( injunctions ) He has enjoined upon you so that you may apply reason .
And do not go near the property of the orphan but in the most likable manner until he reaches the age of maturity . And always give full measure and weight with justice . We do not burden any soul beyond its ability to bear it . And when you say ( something pertaining to somebody ) , do justice even though he is ( your ) near relative . And always fulfil the promise of Allah . These are ( the matters ) which He has strictly ordained for you in order that you may accept direction and guidance .
And that this ( Islamic Law ) is My straight path . So follow it and do not follow ( other ) paths , because they ( i . e . the other paths ) will move you away from Allahs path . This is what He has enjoined you strictly so that you may become Godfearing .
Then We gave Musa ( Moses ) the Book to complete ( the Favour ) on him who would become pious , and ( revealed it ) as explanation of everything and as guidance and mercy , so that they might believe in meeting with their Lord ( on the Day of Resurrection ) .
And this ( Quran ) is a Book which We have revealed full of blessings . So ( now ) follow it and fear ( Allah ) persistently so that you are shown Mercy .
( The Quran has been revealed lest ) you ( should ) say : The ( heavenly ) Book was sent down before us only to the two communities ( the Jews and the Christians ) , and undoubtedly we were unaware of their reading and teaching .
Or ( lest ) you should say : Had the Book been sent down to us we would certainly have been better guided than they are . So , now has come to you from your Lord the clear proof and guidance and mercy . Then who can be more unjust than he who treats the Revelations of Allah as lies and evades them ? Soon shall We inflict an evil torment upon those who evade Our Revelations because they used to turn away ( from the Signs of Allah ) .
They are just waiting for the angels ( of torment ) to reach them , or your Lord to come ( Himself ) , or some ( exclusive ) Signs of your Lord to come ( perceptibly . Tell them : ) The Day when some Signs of your Lord will come ( in such an evident way , then accepting ) the belief will not benefit someone who had not believed before , or did not earn any good ( in the state of ) having believed . Say : Wait ; we ( too ) are waiting .
Surely those who have broken up their religion ( by introducing segregated paths ) and have divided into ( different ) sects , you are not ( concerned with or responsible for ) them in any matter . Their case is only with Allah . Then He would let them know what they used to do .
Whoever brings one good deed will have to his credit ( as a reward ) ten more like it , and whoever brings an evil deed will not be punished for more than one similar ( evil deed ) . And no injustice will be done to them .
Say : Verily my Lord has guided me to the straight path . ( This is the path of ) the well - founded Din ( Religion ) , the path followed by Ibrahim ( Abraham ) single - mindedly devoted to Allah , turning aside from every falsehood . And he was not of the polytheists .
Say : My Prayer , my Hajj ( Pilgrimage ) and sacrifice ( together with the entire worship and servitude ) and my life and my death are for Allah alone , Who is the Lord of all the worlds .
He has no partner and of this have I been commanded and I am the first Muslim ( in the entire creation ) .
Say : Should I look for a Lord other than Allah while He is the Sustainer of everything ? And whatever ( sin ) each soul earns ( its evil outcome ) falls back upon it . And no bearer of burden will bear anothers burden . Then you are to return to your Lord alone , and He will inform you ( of the truth of the matters ) wherein you used to differ .
And He is the One Who has made you vicegerents in the earth and exalted some of you over others in ranks , so that He may test you by means of ( things ) which He has bestowed upon you ( as a trust ) . Surely your Lord is swift in awarding punishment ( to those who deserve it ) , but He is indeed Most Forgiving and Ever - Merciful ( towards the aspirants to forgiveness ) .
Alif , Lam , Mim , Sad . ( Only Allah and the Messenger know the real meaning . )
( O Esteemed Beloved ! ) This is the Book ( that ) has been revealed to you . So , let there be no feeling of constriction in your ( illumined ) breast ( on thinking of the disbelievers belying and denying the promulgation of its message . This has been revealed with the sole purpose ) that by means of it you may warn ( the ones who deny ) , and it ( provides ) direction and guidance to the believers .
( O people ! ) Follow this ( Quran ) which has been sent down to you from your Lord , and do not follow ( any heretic rulers and ) friends other than Him . You take advice but little !
And how many a town ( is such as ) We destroyed ! Our torment came upon them either at night or ( while ) they were asleep at noon .
And when Our torment came upon them , their cry was nothing ( else ) but they began to say : No doubt we were the wrongdoers .
Then We shall certainly interrogate those towards whom We sent Messengers , and We shall assuredly ask the Messengers as well ( with regard to the response of their call for Truth and their teaching and preaching ) .
We shall then relate to them from ( Our ) knowledge ( all their ) affairs , and We were not absent ( from anywhere , unable somehow to monitor them ) .
And on that Day the weighing ( of deeds ) is a truth . So those whose scales ( of righteous deeds ) are heavy will be successful .
But those whose scales ( of righteous deeds ) are light , it is they who have harmed their souls because they had been unjust to Our Revelations .
And surely We established you firmly on earth with control and authority and created therein means of sustenance for you . Yet you thank but little .
And certainly We did create you ( i . e . your real being ) , then gave you shape ( i . e . accomplished the phases of chemical and biological genesis and evolution of life till the completion of the physical existence of Adam ) . Then We commanded the angels : Prostrate yourselves before Adam . They all prostrated themselves except Iblis ; he was not of those who prostrate themselves .
( Allah ) said : ( O Iblis ) ! What inhibited you that you did not prostrate yourself when I commanded you ? He said : I am better than he . You have created me from fire and You have made him from clay .
( Allah ) said : So , get you down from here . You have no way any right to show arrogance here . Away with you ( from My Presence ) ! You are certainly of the disgraced and humiliated lot .
He ( Iblis ) said : Grant me respite ( to live ) till the Day when people will be raised up ( from the graves ) .
( Allah ) said : Indeed You are of the respited .
He ( Iblis ) said : Since You have led me astray , ( I swear that ) I will ( also ) sit on Your straight path ( to waylay the children of Adam till I cause them to deviate from the path of Truth ) .
I will assuredly approach them from their front , from their rear , from their right and from their left and ( consequently ) You will not find most of them grateful .
Allah commanded : ( O Iblis ! ) Be gone from here , humiliated and cursed . Whoever of them will follow you I will certainly fill Hell with all of you .
And , O Adam , reside you and your wife ( both ) in Paradise and eat from wherever you wish . And ( beware ! ) Do not go near this tree lest you become of those who transgress .
But Satan created doubt in the hearts of both ( Adam and Hawwa [ Eve ] ) in order to make manifest to them their private parts which were hidden ( from their eyes ) . He said : ( O Adam and Hawwa [ Eve ] , ) your Lord has not forbidden you ( eating fruit of ) this tree but ( because , eating it , ) you both should transform into angels ( free from human characteristics ) or both of you become ( its ) permanent residents ( i . e . never will you be deprived of this station of proximity ) .
And he swore to both of them , saying : I am indeed of your well - wishers .
So by means of deceit he tempted both of them down ( into eating the fruit of the tree ) . When both had tasted ( the fruit of ) the tree , their private parts became manifest to them and they started sticking the leaves of Paradise to their ( bodies ) . Then their Lord called out to them : Did I not forbid both of you ( to get closer to ) that tree and did I ( not ) say to you that Satan was indeed an open enemy of you both ?
Both of them submitted : O our Lord ! We have wronged our souls . And if You do not forgive us and have mercy on us , we shall certainly be among the losers .
( Allah ) said : Go down ( all of you and live in the earth ) ; some of you are enemies of others . A residence and means of living ( have been determined ) for you in the earth for a fixed term ( i . e . you are sent down with two basic rights of dwelling and subsistence in the earth ; so , organize and stabilize the system of your life on that ) .
( Allah ) said : You will spend your life in the very same earth , and will die in it and from the same will you be brought forth ( on the Day of Resurrection ) .
O mankind ! Surely We have sent down for you ( such a ) clothing that hides your private parts and adds ( to your ) aesthetic value . And ( in addition to your outward clothes We have also provided you an inward dress as well and that is ) the dress of Allahs fear ( which ) is the best . ( All these inner and outer attires ) are the Signs of Allah so that they may take advice .
O mankind ! ( Beware ! ) Let not Satan put you to the test , as he ousted your parents from Paradise , stripping them of their dress so as to unveil to them their private parts . Indeed he ( himself ) and his clan keep watching you ( from such positions where ) you cannot catch sight of them . Verily We have made the satans friends of those who do not believe .
And when they commit some indecency they say : We found our ancestors on the same ( way ) and Allah has enjoined the same upon us . Say : Allah does not enjoin acts of indecency . Do you say about ( the Essence of ) Allah such things as you do not know ( even ) yourselves ?
Say : My Lord has enjoined justice . And set your direction aright ( towards the Kaba ) on every occasion and place of prostration . And worship Him devoting your obedience sincerely to Him alone . As He has originated your ( creation and life ) so will you return ( towards Him ) .
He guided one group but error was proved on the other ( consequent on their own doings ) . Indeed they made friends with satans leaving Allah aside and think that they are the rightly guided .
O Children of Adam ! Dress up decently every time you offer Prayer . And eat and drink but do not spend extravagantly because certainly He does not like the extravagant .
Say : Who has forbidden the adornment ( and beautification ) of Allah that He has produced for His servants and ( who has forbidden also ) the pure and clean food ? Say : ( All these bounties ) that are ( available generally ) for the believers in the life of this world will be exclusively ( for them ) on the Day of Resurrection . This way We elucidate Our Revelations for those who have knowledge .
Say : My Lord has declared unlawful only ( all ) the indecent acts which become known and which remain hidden and sins and unjust excesses , and that you associate with Allah that for which He has not sent down any authority , and ( in addition ) saying such things about ( the Essence of ) Allah as you do not know yourselves .
And a term ( has been appointed ) for every people and when their ( fixed ) hour approaches they can neither hold back nor advance ( even ) for a single moment .
O Children of Adam ! If Messengers come to you from among yourselves who relate to you My Revelations , then whoever becomes Godfearing and pious and amends ( himself ) , neither will any fear obsess them nor will they grieve .
But those who belie Our Revelations and turn away from ( believing in ) them in defiance , it is they who are the inmates of Hell , its permanent residents .
Then who can be a greater wrongdoer than the one who fabricates a lie against Allah or rejects His Revelations as false ? ( That ) share of such people will reach them ( as ) has been written in the Book , until when the ( angels ) whom We send will come to them to take away their souls they will say ( to them ) : Now where are those ( false gods ) whom you used to worship besides Allah ? They will say ( replying ) : They are lost from us ( i . e . how can they be seen now ! ) , and they will bear witness ( themselves ) against their own souls that they were doubtlessly disbelievers .
Allah will say : Enter into the Fire , joining those ( Hellish ) groups of jinn and men who have passed before you . Whenever a party will enter ( Hell ) , it will curse its sister party until , when all ( groups ) will forgather , their successors will say in respect of their predecessors : O our Lord , these are the people who led us astray , so increase their torment of Hell two times . He will say : It is double for everyone but you know it not .
And their predecessors will say to their successors : You have not gained any superiority over us , so you ( too ) taste the torment ( now ) for what you used to earn .
Indeed those who reject Our Revelations as false and rebel against them , the gates of the heavens ( of Mercy and Acceptance ) shall not be opened to them , nor will they be able to enter Paradise until the camel passes through the eye of a needle ( i . e . their entrance into Paradise will be impossible the same way ) . And it is like that We punish the evildoers .
The ( Fire of ) Hell will be their mattress as well as a covering over them , and We torment the wrongdoers the same way .
But those who believe and do good works persistently , We do not burden anyone beyond his endurance ; it is they who are the people of Paradise ; they will live in it forever .
And We shall remove from their breasts ( rancour and ) spite ( that they had for others in the world ) . Streams will flow under ( their palaces ) and they will say : All praise belongs to Allah alone Who has brought us here . Had Allah not guided us , we would never have made our way through ( to this station ) . Verily , the Messengers of our Lord brought us ( the message of ) Truth . It will be called out ( that Day ) : You have been made heirs to this Paradise for the ( pious ) deeds that you used to do .
And the people of Paradise will call out to the inmates of Hell : We have really found true the promise that our Lord made to us . Have you ( also ) found true what your Lord promised ( you ) ? They will answer : Yes . Thereupon a herald will call out among them : The curse of Allah is on the wrongdoers .
( It is they ) who used to hinder ( the people ) from the path of Allah and look for crookedness in it and they disbelieved in the Hereafter .
And between both ( of them i . e . the inmates of Paradise and Hell ) there is a barrier ( ramparts or heights ) , and on the Araf ( the ramparts ) there will be men who will recognize all by their features . And they will call out to the people of Paradise : Peace be upon you . They ( the people of the Araf [ the Heights ] ) will not have entered Paradise ( themselves as yet ) but will be aspiring ( to that ) .
And when their eyes will be turned towards the inmates of Hell , they will say : O our Lord , ( join ) us not ( together ) with the unjust people .
And the people of the Araf ( the Heights ) will call out to those people ( of Hell ) whom they will be recognizing by their identification marks saying ( to them ) : Your parties could not be of any use for you , nor ( could rescue you ) your arrogance that you used to practise .
Is it they about whom you used to swear ( on seeing their miserable plight ) : Allah will ( never ) bless them with His Mercy ? ( But listen ! It is they who are now being called : ) Enter Paradise ; you will neither fear nor grieve .
And the inmates of Hell will call out to the inhabitants of Paradise : Bless us with some water ( of Paradise ) or of ( the provision ) that Allah has granted you . They will say : Allah has indeed forbidden both ( these bounties ) to the disbelievers .
Those that made their Din ( Religion ) a funfair and sport and whom the worldly life had deceived . We shall forget them Today as they forgot their meeting of this Day ( with Us ) and as they used to deny Our Revelations .
And surely We have brought them such a Book ( the Quran ) which We have elucidated ( i . e . made clear ) on ( the basis of Our ) knowledge , a guidance and a mercy for those who believe .
They are just waiting for the outcome of that ( stated matter ) . The Day when the outcome of that ( matter ) will be unfolded , the people who had forgotten it before this will say : No doubt the Messengers of our Lord came with the Truth . So , are there any intercessors ( Today ) who will intercede for us ? Or , could we be returned ( to the world again ) so that ( this time ) we might do deeds different from ( those ) that we had been perpetrating ( before ) ? They certainly harmed themselves , and that ( lie and fabrication ) which they used to invent has parted with them .
Indeed Allah is your Lord , Who created the heavens and the earth in six aeons ( six phases ) , and then ( matching His Glory ) ascended to His Throne ( i . e . enforced in the universe the system of His Sovereign Command and Control ) . He wraps up the day with the night ( under the arrangement that the day and the night ) keep chasing one another swiftly . And the sun and the moon and the stars ( all ) have been subjected to ( a system ) under His Command . Beware ! He is the One Who runs the system of Creating ( everything ) , Planning , Command and Control . Blessed is Allah Who gradually and progressively sustains and nourishes all the worlds .
Invoke your Lord ( both ) most submissively and on the queit . Surely He does not like the transgressors .
And do not cause disruption and mischief in the land after it has been set in order ( i . e . after reformation of living conditions in the country ) . And keep supplicating Him fearing ( His torment ) and aspiring ( to His Mercy ) . Assuredly Allahs Mercy is near to those who are ( spiritually excellent , ) committed to doing pious works .
And He is the One Who sends the winds as glad tidings before His Mercy ( rain ) until when these ( winds ) bring moisture - laden heavy clouds , We drive these ( clouds ) towards a town dead ( of drought and infertility ) . Then We cause downpour from ( the clouds ) , and by means of this ( water ) We bring forth fruits of all kinds ( from the earth ) . In like manner We shall bring forth the dead ( from the graves on the Day of Resurrection ) , so that you may take direction and guidance .
And the soil which is productive ( i . e . fertile ) yields vegetation ( plentifully ) by the Command of Allah , but ( the soil ) which is sterile brings forth nothing but scanty rubbish . In the same way We repeatedly elucidate ( Our ) Revelations ( Proofs and Signs ) for the people who are grateful .
Indeed We sent Nuh ( Noah ) to his people . So he said : O my people ! Worship Allah ; you have no other God except He . Verily I fear for you the torment of a dreadful Day .
The chiefs and the affluent of his people said : ( O Nuh - Noah , ) surely we find you ( caught ) in an open error .
He said : O my people , there is not any error in me but ( the truth is that ) I am ( raised as ) a Messenger by the Lord of all the worlds .
I communicate to you the messages of my Lord and exhort you , and I know from Allah that which you do not know .
Do you wonder that direction and guidance from your Lord has come ( on the tongue ) of a man from among yourselves so that he may warn you ( of the chastisement of Allah ) , and that you become Godfearing , and the purpose is that Mercy may be shown to you ?
Then they belied him . So We delivered him and those who were with him in the Ark and We drowned all those who rejected Our Revelations as false . They were indeed a blind people ( with no insight ) .
And to ( the people of ) Ad We ( sent ) their ( kinship ) brother Hud . He said : O my people , always worship Allah ; you have no other God except He . Will you not become Godfearing ?
The chiefs and the affluent of his people who disbelieved ( i . e . resisted and opposed the call for Truth ) said : ( O Hud , ) we really find you ( steeped ) in foolishness and we think you are surely one of the liars .
He said : O my people , there is no foolishness about me but ( the truth is that ) I am ( raised as ) a Messenger from the Lord of all the worlds .
I am communicating to you the messages of my Lord and I am your trustworthy well - wisher .
Do you wonder that direction and guidance from your Lord has come ( on the tongue ) of a man from among yourselves so that he may warn you ( of the chastisement of Allah ) ? And call to mind when He made you the successors ( in the land ) after the people of Nuh ( Noah ) and in raising you amply augmented your power ( might and stature ) . So remember the Favours of Allah so that you may prosper .
They said : Have you come to us ( that ) we may worship only One God , Allah , and forsake ( all those gods ) whom our ancestors used to worship ? So bring upon us that ( torment ) you have warned us of if you are of the truthful .
He said : Certainly the torment and wrath upon you from your Lord has become inevitable . Do you dispute with me over the names ( of those idols ) which you ( yourselves ) and your ancestors have ( supposedly ) named and for which Allah has not sent down any authority ? So wait ( for the torment ) ; I am ( also ) with you among those who wait .
Then We emancipated him and those who were on his side by Our Mercy and cut the roots of those who denied Our Revelations . And they were those who would never have believed .
And to ( the people of ) Thamud We ( sent ) their ( kinship ) brother Salih . He said : O my people , always worship Allah ; you have no other God except He . Indeed there has come to you from your Lord a clear Sign . This she - camel of Allah is a Sign for you . So leave her ( free ) to graze in Allahs earth and do not touch her with an evil ( intention ) or a grievous torment will seize you .
And remember when He made you successors ( in the land ) after ( the people of ) Ad and granted you settlement in the land . You build castles in the soft ( plain ) areas and carve out mountains to chisel dwellings ( out of them ) . So remember ( these ) Favours of Allah and do not cause disruption and mischief in the land .
The arrogant and rebellious chiefs and the rich of his people asked the poor and the down - trodden who had accepted faith : Are you sure that Salih has been really sent from his Lord ( as His Messenger ) ? They said : We surely believe in whatever he has been sent with .
The arrogant said : No doubt we strongly deny ( that ) which you have believed in .
So they killed the she - camel ( by hamstringing ) and rebelled against the command of their Lord and said : O Salih ! Bring upon us that ( torment ) you have threatened us with if you are ( truly ) from among the Messengers .
So ( the torment of ) a high - scale earthquake seized them and in the morning they lay ( dead ) in their homes with faces down upon the ground .
Then ( Salih ) turned away from them , saying : O my people , verily I delivered to you the message of my Lord and gave you advice ( as well ) but you do not like the counsellors .
And ( likewise We sent ) Lut ( [ Lot ] as well ) when he said to his people : Do you perpetrate ( such ) lasciviousness as no people in the world have attempted before you ?
Verily you go after men for your lust leaving the women ; you are in truth given to transgression .
And his people had no reply except that they said : Drive them out of the town ; indeed they seek extreme purity !
So We delivered him ( Lut [ Lot ] ) and his family except his wife ; she was one of those who stay on in torment .
And We rained on them ( stones ) . See then what the end of the evildoers was !
And towards Madyan ( We sent ) their ( kinship ) brother Shuaib . He said : O my people , always worship Allah ; you have no God except He . Indeed there has come to you from your Lord a clear sign . So give full measure and weight and do not decrease while giving people their things , nor create mischief in the land after reformation ( of the living conditions ) . This is better for you if you believe ( in the Divine Message ) .
And do not sit on every path to frighten everyone who has embraced faith in this ( Call ) and to hinder ( him ) from the path of Allah and to look for any crookedness in this ( Message to make him feel frustrated and disgusted with the true Din [ Religion ] ) . And remember ( Allahs favour ) when you were small in number and He multiplied you , and see what was the end of those who spread mischief and cause disruption !
And if a party among you have believed in that ( Din [ Religion ] ) which I have been sent with and some other party have not believed in it , then , ( O Believers , ) have patience till Allah judges between us and He is the Best of judges .
The rebellious and arrogant chiefs and the capitalists of his people said : O Shuaib , we shall in any case drive you out of our town and those who , in your company , have embraced faith or else you shall have to return to our religion . Shuaib said : Even though we despise ( to return to your religion ) ?
Indeed we would invent a lie against Allah if we returned to your religion after Allah has saved us from it . And it is not at all ( appropriate ) for us to return to that ( religion ) unless Allah , our Lord , so wills . As for His knowledge , our Lord encompasses everything ; we have put our trust in Allah alone . O our Lord , judge between us and our ( hostile ) people with Truth and You are the Best of judges .
And the chiefs and capitalists of his people , who had disbelieved ( and denied the Truth ) , said : O people , if you follow Shuaib then you will surely be the losers .
Then a ( torment of ) high - scale earthquake seized them and in the morning they were dead lying prone in their homes .
Those who belied Shuaib were ( annihilated ) , as if they had ( never ) lived in that ( town ) . Those who belied Shuaib , it was ( in fact ) they who became the losers .
Then ( Shuaib ) separated from them and said : O my people , verily , I communicated to you the Messages of my Lord and I admonished you ( as well ) . Then why should I regret ( the devastation of ) a disbelieving people ?
And never did We send a Messenger to any land but that We seized its inhabitants with hardship , scarcity , adversity and suffering ( due to belying and defying the Messenger ) so that they might moan and go humble .
We then changed ( their ) misfortune with good fortune till they made ( an all - embracing ) progress . But ( out of ingratitude ) they said : Our ancestors too have been living through pain and pleasure ( the same way ) . So We caught them unawares on this ingratitude and they did not even notice ( it ) .
But if the inhabitants of ( these ) towns had embraced faith and adopted Godwariness We would have opened to them blessings from the heavens and the earth . But they rejected ( the Truth ) . So We seized them with ( torment ) for the ( impious acts ) they used to perpetrate .
Have the residents of the towns now become free of this fear that Our torment may seize them ( again ) at night when they are ( fast ) asleep ( in carefree slumber ) ?
Or are the residents of the towns free of this fear that Our torment may seize them ( again ) in the forenoon when they are at play ( completely lost in the worldly pleasures ) ?
Are they fearless of Allahs secret plan ? So , no one feels fearless against the secret plan of Allah except the people who run into loss .
Does ( this also ) not guide and ( enlighten ) those who have inherited the earth ( themselves ) after ( the destruction of ) those ( one time ) dwelling in the earth that if We desire We may punish them ( as well ) for their sins and We shall seal their hearts ( due to their evil behaviour ) so they will be unable to hear ( and understand the Truth ) .
These are the towns whose news We are narrating to you . Surely their Messengers came to them with Clear Signs . But ( even then ) they remained inert to believe in what they had rejected before . That is how Allah seals up the hearts of the disbelievers .
And We did not find ( the fulfilment of ) commitment in most of them and We found most of them but disobedient .
Then after them We sent Musa ( Moses ) with Our Signs to Pharaoh and the nobles of his ( court ) , but they did injustice to ( these Proofs and Miracles ) . See , then , what was the end of those who spread mischief and strife !
And Musa ( Moses ) said : O Pharaoh ! Indeed I am ( raised as ) a Messenger from the Lord of all the worlds .
What behooves me is to say ( nothing ) about Allah but the Truth . I have indeed brought you a Clear Sign from your Lord . So send away with me the Children of Israel ( setting them free of your yoke of slavery ) .
He ( Pharaoh ) said : If you have brought a Sign then bring it ( to the fore ) if you are truthful .
So Musa ( Moses ) put his staff ( down ) , and at once it changed into a veritable serpent .
And he drew out his hand ( after putting it into his collar opening ) and that ( too ) at once became ( radiant ) white to the viewers .
The chiefs of Pharaohs people said : He is for sure ( some ) expert magician .
( O people ! ) He seeks to drive you out of your land . So , what do you advise ?
They said : Put ( the matter ) of Musa ( Moses ) and his brother off ( for a while ) and send out heralds to ( different ) cities to summon ( magicians ) .
They would bring you every skilful sorcerer .
And the magicians came to Pharaoh and said : There should certainly be some reward for us if we overmaster .
Pharaoh said : Yes , of course ; ( what to talk of a simple reward , in that case ) you will be among the privileged ones ( of my court ) .
( The magicians ) said : Musa ( Moses ) ! Either you throw ( your object ) or we become ( the first ) to throw .
Musa ( Moses ) said : You throw ( first ) . So when they threw ( their strings and sticks on the ground ) they bewitched the eyes of the people , and struck them with awe , and brought ( forth ) an extremely effective magic .
And We revealed to Musa ( Moses ) : ( Now ) throw your staff ( on the ground ) . Then at once it began swallowing up what they had fabricated through deception .
So , the Truth was established , and everything that they had been doing was proved false .
So , they ( the representatives of Pharaoh ) were vanquished on the spot and backed away humiliated .
And ( all ) the sorcerers fell down prostrate .
They exclaimed : We believe in the ( real ) Sustainer of all the worlds .
( The ) Lord of Musa ( Moses ) and Harun ( Moses and Aaron ) .
Pharaoh said : ( Have ) you believed in Him even before I permitted you ? This is indeed a plot which you ( all ) have hatched ( against me ) in this city in order that you may expatriate from this ( country ) its ( Coptic ) inhabitants . So you will know ( its consequences ) very soon .
Surely , I shall cut off your hands and your feet on alternate sides and then , most certainly , I shall crucify all of you .
They said : Verily , we are to return to our Lord .
And which of our acts has annoyed you ? Just that we have believed in the ( true ) Signs of our Lord when they reached us . O our Lord ! Gush on us torrents of patience and lift us ( from the world ) as ( steadfast ) Muslims .
And the chiefs of the people of Pharaoh said ( to Pharaoh ) : Will you leave Musa ( Moses ) and his ( revolutionary ) people to launch strife in the country ? And ( then ) will they spare you and your gods ? He said : ( No , ) we shall now kill their sons ( to exhaust their male numerical strength ) and let their women live ( so that they may be wronged ) . And surely we hold sway over them .
Musa ( Moses ) said to his people : Seek help from Allah and be steadfast ; surely the earth belongs to Allah . He makes its inheritors whom He likes of His servants . And it ends well for the Godfearing alone .
They said : ( O Musa ( Moses ) [ Moses ] ! ) We were persecuted before you came to us and after your arrival as well . ( We have suffered both ways . When will our misery end ? ) Musa ( [ Moses ] appeasing his people ) said : Your Lord would soon destroy your enemy and ( then ) make you the successors ( to the governance ) in the land and He will then monitor how you perform ( after coming into power ) .
Then We seized the people of Pharaoh with ( the torment of ) some years ( of famine ) and scarce yield of fruits so that they might be admonished .
But whenever relief reached them , they would say : This is owing to us . And when adversity befell them , they would ascribe it as an ill - omen to Musa ( Moses ) and his companions ( of faith ) . Beware ! Their omen ( i . e . the evil outcome of their doings ) lies with Allah alone . But most of them do not know .
And they ( the people of Pharaoh ) said ( arrogantly ) : ( O Musa [ Moses ] ! ) Whatever Sign you bring us to cast a spell upon us , we are not prone to believe in you .
Then We sent upon them ( many ) distinct signs ( as chastisement ) : storms , locusts , lice , frogs and blood . ( Even ) then they continued with arrogance and rebellion and they were an ( extremely ) sinful people .
And when ( some ) torment befell them , they would say : O Musa ( Moses ) ! Pray for us to your Lord by means of ( His ) promise with you . If you avert this torment from us , we will surely believe in you and will send with you the Children of Israel ( setting them free ) .
But when We would remove from them the torment for the appointed term which they nearly completed , they would at once break their promise .
Then ultimately We took retribution from them ( for all their disobedience and breach of promises ) and drowned them in the river because they ( successively ) belied Our Revelations and were ( absolutely ) neglectful of them .
And We made the people ( i . e . the Children of Israel ) who were powerless and oppressed the inheritors of the east and the west of the land ( Egypt and Syria ) wherein We had placed blessing . And ( in this way ) a fair promise of your Lord with the Children of Israel was fulfilled because they remained steadfast ( in the face of Pharaohs tyranny and oppression ) . And We destroyed ( those magnificent castles ) which Pharaoh and his people had built , and those towers ( and the gardens ) too which they used to raise high .
And We brought the Children of Israel across the ( Mediterranean ) Sea where they came upon a people who were squatting around their idols ( for worship ) in deep devotion . They ( the Children of Israel ) said : O Musa ( Moses ) ! Make for us too a god like the ones they have . Musa ( Moses ) said : You are surely a very ignorant people .
Verily that whose ( worship ) they are ( tangled in ) is destined to ruin and whatever they are doing is ( utter ) heresy .
( Musa [ Moses ] ) said : Should I seek for you a god other than Allah while He ( Allah ) is the One Who has granted you superiority over all the worlds ?
And remember ( the time ) when We delivered you from the people of Pharaoh who used to afflict you with fierce torment . They used to slay your boys and spare your girls alive . And in that there was a great trial for you from your Lord .
And We promised Musa ( Moses ) thirty nights and We made it good by adding to it ( another ) ten ( nights ) . So the term ( appointed ) by his Lord was completed in forty nights . And Musa ( Moses ) said to his brother Harun ( Aaron ) : ( In the meanwhile , ) officiate at my seat among my people and continue to do ( their ) reformation , and follow not the way of those who create mischief ( i . e . prevent them from treading this path ) .
And when Musa ( Moses ) came at the time ( set ) by Us and his Lord spoke to him he ( ardently aspired to behold Him out of the pleasure of hearing Allahs Word and Voice and ) submitted : O Lord , show me ( Your Beauty ) so that I may savour Your Sight . Allah said : By no means can you look upon Me ( directly ) but look towards the mountain . So if it stays firm in its place then soon will you behold My Beauty . When his Lord unveiled the Light ( of His Divine Beauty ) on to the mountain , ( He ) crushed it into sand particles ( with the intense Divine Radiance ) and Musa ( Moses ) fell down unconscious . Then when he recovered , he submitted : Holy You are and I turn to You in repentance and I am the first of those who believe .
( Allah ) said : O Musa ( Moses ) ! I have exalted you and chosen you above all the people by My Messages and My conversation . So hold fast to whatever I have bestowed upon you and be among the grateful .
And We ( have ) inscribed for him on the Tablets ( of the Torah ) instructions for every matter and detail of everything . Hold it with firmness and enjoin your people ( as well ) to adopt its best things . Soon shall I show you the abode of the disobedient .
I shall keep those from ( comprehending and accepting ) My Revelations who are unjustly arrogant in the land . And ( even ) if they see all Signs they shall not believe in them and ( even ) if they find the path of guidance they shall not adopt it as ( their ) way but if they perceive the wrong path , they will embrace it as their way . It is because they denied Our Revelations and remained negligent of them .
And those who belie Our Revelations and the meeting of the Last Day , their actions become void . What will they be rewarded except what they have been doing ?
And after Musa ( [ Moses ] left for the Mount of Tur ) , his people contrived a calf out of their ornaments ( which was ) a carving with a mooing sound . Did they not see that it could neither speak to them nor show them any path ? They took the same ( as god ) and they were unjust .
And when they felt deeply ashamed of what they had done , and realized that they had really gone astray , they said : If our Lord does not have mercy on us and forgive us , we shall certainly be among the losers .
And when Musa ( Moses ) returned to his people pent up with anger and grief , he said : You have perpetrated a serious evil in my absence ( after my departure ) . Did you make haste by the Command of your Lord ? And ( Musa [ Moses ] ) put down the Tablets ( of the Torah ) and catching his brothers head pulled him towards himself . ( Then ) Harun ( Aaron ) said : O son of my mother ! Surely these people considered me weak and had nearly killed me ( on my forbidding ) . So do not provide the enemies an opportunity to laugh at me , nor include me among ( the clan of ) these wrongdoers .
Musa ( Moses ) said : O my Lord ! Forgive me and my brother and admit us to ( the Embrace of ) Your Mercy and You are the Most Merciful of those who show mercy .
Surely those who have taken the calf ( as a god ) , the wrath from their Lord will seize them together with humiliation in the life of this world . That is how We punish those who invent falsehood .
But those who perpetrate evil works then repent afterwards and believe , ( then ) after that your Lord is indeed Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
And when the anger of Musa ( Moses ) became sublimated , he picked up the Tablets , and in the inscription of these ( Tablets ) was ( mentioned ) guidance and mercy for those who fear their Lord much .
And Musa ( Moses ) chose seventy men of his people for a time set by Us ( to appear before Our Presence for forgiveness ) , but when a high - scale earthquake seized them ( as punishment for not forbidding the people to perpetrate evil ) , Musa ( Moses ) submitted : O Lord ! If You willed You would destroy these people and me even before this . Will You cause us to perish for that ( omission ) which the foolish among us have committed ? This is just a trail from You by which You hold astray whom You will and guide whom You desire . You alone are our Guardian , so forgive us and have mercy on us . And You are the Best of those who forgive .
And ordain for us good in ( the life of ) this world ( as well as ) in the Hereafter . Surely we have turned and totally inclined towards You . ( Allah ) said : I inflict My punishment on whom I will and My Mercy encompasses everything . So , very soon I shall prescribe this ( mercy ) for those who adopt Godwariness and pay Zakat ( the Alms - due ) regularly , and it is they who have faith in Our Revelations .
( They are the people ) who follow the Messenger , the Prophet ( titled as ) al - Ummi ( who imparts to the people from Allah the news of the unseen and knowledge and secrets of socio - economic disciplines of life without himself being taught by any human in the world ) ; whose ( eminent attributes and exquisite powers ) these people find written in the Torah and the Injil ( Gospel ) ; who enjoins on them virtues and forbids them vices , declares wholesome things lawful and impure ones unlawful for them and removes from them their heavy burdens and yokes ( shackles ) weighing upon them ( due to their acts of disobedience and blesses them with freedom ) . So those who will believe in this ( most exalted Messenger ) and will venerate and revere him and serve and support him ( in his Din [ Religion ] ) and follow this light ( the Quran ) that has been sent down with him , it is they who will flourish and prosper .
Say : O mankind ! I have ( come ) to all of you ( as ) the Messenger of Allah to Whom belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . There is no God except He . He is the One Who grants life and causes death . So believe in Allah and His Messenger who is a Prophet ( crowned with the glory of being ) al - Ummi ( i . e . he has not learnt anything from anyone except Allah but knows far more than the entire creation , and is innocent and pure like a newborn baby despite his upbringing in an infidel and polytheist society ) , who believes in Allah and ( all ) His ( revealed ) Books and follow him alone so that you may take guidance .
And a party among the people of Musa ( Moses ) ( [ Moses ] comprises those ) who guide to the path of truth and according to that ( make judgments based on ) justice .
And We divided them into twelve tribes as separate communities . And when his people asked him for water , We sent ( this ) Revelation to Musa ( Moses ) : Strike that rock with your staff . So twelve springs gushed out from it and every tribe found its drinking place . And We stretched over them clouds for shade and sent down to them manna and quails ( and said to them : ) Eat of the pure things that We have provided for you . ( But ) they have not wronged Us ( by disobedience and disregard ) . They have rather wronged their own souls .
And ( recall ) when it was said to them : Dwell in this town ( Baitul - Maqdis [ Jerusalem ] or Ariha [ Jericho ] ) and eat of it wherever you like and keep saying ( with your tongue ) : Forgive ( our sins ) , and enter the gate ( of the city ) in a state of prostration ; ( then ) We shall forgive all your sins . Soon shall We grant more favours to the pious .
But the unjust among them substituted some other statement for that which they were told . So We sent upon them torment from heaven because they were engaged in injustice and wickedness .
And enquire of them the plight of the town which was situated on the seashore when they transgressed ( the Commandments with regard to the Sabbath ) Saturday . ( This occurred ) when the fish swarmed from all sides appearing to ( the surface of ) water on their ( venerated ) Saturday . And ( the fish ) would not come to them on ( the rest of ) the days which they did not revere like Saturday . We were trying them this way because they were disobedient .
And when a section of them said ( to those who were performing the duty of preaching Dawa ) : Why do you advise a people whom Allah is about to destroy or afflict with severe torment ? they replied : In order to submit ( our ) excuse before your Lord , and ( also ) because they may become righteous and Godwary .
Then , when they forgot ( all ) what they had been advised We delivered those who were engaged in forbidding evil ( i . e . performing the duty of preaching donts ) and seized ( the rest of ) the people who committed injustice ( actively or passively ) with a very harsh punishment because they were disobeying .
Then when they defied ( the command to give up ) what they were prohibited , We commanded them : Be you apes , despised and detested .
And ( also recall the time ) when your Lord announced ( this ) command ( to the Jews ) that ( Allah ) shall be bringing upon them such ( one or the other ) tyrant as would continue afflicting them with evil hardships till the Day of Resurrection . Surely your Lord is Swift in punishment , and indeed He is Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful ( as well ) .
And We divided them into several communities ( and scattered ) over the earth ( i . e . made them undergo Diaspora ) . Some among them are righteous and , unlike them , others from among the ( same ) folk are ( evildoers ) too . And We tried them with ( both ) prosperity and adversity so that they might turn ( towards Allah ) .
Then after them a characterless people succeeded ( them ) who inherited the Book . These ( successors ) take ( as bribe ) the wealth and riches of this base ( world ) and say : Soon shall we be forgiven , while if more of similar riches come to them , they will take that too . Was the promise of the Book ( of Allah ) not taken from them that they would not say of Allah ( anything ) but the truth ? And they had read ( all ) that was ( written ) in it . And the abode of the Hereafter is of greater value for those who adopt Godwariness . Do you not understand ?
And those who hold fast to the Book ( of Allah ) and establish Prayer ( with punctuality , then ) certainly We do not waste the reward of those who reform .
And ( recall the time ) when We raised the mountain over them as though it were a canopy and they feared it was about to fall on them . ( So We said to them : Do not fear ; instead ) hold fast to that ( Book pragmatically ) which We have given you and bear well in mind those ( injunctions ) which are ( contained ) in it so that you are protected ( from the torment ) .
And ( call to mind ) when your Lord brought forth the human race from the loins of the Children of Adam and made them bear testimony to their own souls ( and said : ) Am I not your Lord ? They ( all ) said : Why not ! We bear witness ( that You alone are our Lord . This He did ) lest you should say on the Day of Resurrection : We were unaware of this promise .
Or ( lest ) you start saying : It was but our ancestors who associated partners with Allah before and we were but ( their ) descendants after them ( i . e . they are the real sinners , not we ) . So , will You destroy us on account of that ( sin ) which the infidels perpetrated ?
And this is how We elucidate Our Revelations so that they may turn ( towards the Truth ) .
And relate to them his account ( too ) whom We gave Our Signs , but then he made an exit from their ( knowledge and admonition ) and Satan chased him . So he turned into one of those who lost the right path .
And had We so willed We would have exalted him by means of ( knowledge and implementation of ) these ( Revelations ) , but he ( himself ) tracked down to ( the lowest levels of the ) earthly life and became the follower of his lust . ( Now ) his example is that of a dog . If you treat him harshly , he will loll out his tongue or if you leave him alone , he will ( still ) loll out his tongue . This example is of those who deny Our Revelations . So relate these occurrences ( to the people ) so that they may contemplate .
As an example they were an extremely bad community who belied Our Revelations ! ( In fact ) they persistently wronged their own souls .
He whom Allah guides so he alone is the rightly guided , but he whom Allah holds astray , it is they who are the losers .
And surely We have created a large ( number ) of jinn and human beings for Hell : They have hearts ( and minds but ) cannot understand ( the Truth ) with them ; and they have eyes ( but ) cannot perceive ( the Truth ) with them ; and ( also ) they possess ears ( but ) cannot hear ( the Truth ) with them . They are like cattle , rather more misguided ( than that ) . It is they who are neglectful .
And the Most Beautiful Names belong to Allah alone , so call on Him by these Names . And leave aside those people who turn away from the Truth with regard to His Names . Soon will they be punished for the ( impious acts ) that they perpetrate .
And of those whom We have created there is ( also ) a section ( of people ) who direct others towards the Truth , and alongside that make judgments based on justice .
But those who deny Our Revelations , We shall soon lead them gradually towards catastrophe in such an imperceptible manner that they will not even notice it .
And I am giving them respite ; indeed My grip is inescapable .
Have they not reflected that the Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) , who honours them with ( his ) companionship , has not contracted any mania ? He is only a plain Warner ( to the disobedient ) .
Have they not looked into the kingdom of the heavens and the earth and whatever Allah has created ( apart from that ? And have they not considered that ) it may well be that their appointed term ( death ) has drawn near ? Then what will they believe in after this ?
There is no guide for one whom Allah holds astray . And He leaves them to wander in defiance so that they may grope on .
These ( disbelievers ) ask you about the Last Hour : When will it take place ? Say : Knowledge of it rests with my Lord alone ; none but He ( Allah ) will manifest it at its ( appointed ) time . It is ( seemingly ) heavy on ( the residents of ) the heavens and the earth ( due to the horror of its adversities and intensities ) . It will occur to you all of a sudden ( accidentally ) . They ask you ( in such a manner ) as if you are engaged in its pursuit ! Say : Knowledge of it is only with Allah , but most people do not know ( this fact ) .
( Also ) tell ( them ) : I do not have any control over profit and loss for myself , except ( that much ) which Allah wills . And ( in the same way ) if I had the knowledge of the Unseen on my own ( without Allahs bestowal ) , I would myself have managed abundant good fortune ( and victories ) , and no hardship ( and trouble on any occasion ) would have touched me . ( By virtue of my station as a Messenger ) I am only a Warner and Bearer of glad tidings for the believers .
And He ( Allah ) is the One Who has created you from a single soul and made his spouse from that , so that he might find comfort in her . Then when man covers her , she conceives and , bearing a light burden , moves around . Later , when she grows heavy , then both pray to their Lord , Allah : If You give us a healthy child , we shall certainly be among the thankful .
Then when He gives them a healthy child , both of them associate partners with Him in respect of that ( child ) . But Allah is Transcendent of all that they ascribe to Him as partners .
Do they associate those who cannot create anything and have ( themselves ) been created as partners with Him ?
Neither do they have power to help these ( polytheists ) nor can they help even themselves .
And if you call them to ( the path of ) guidance , they will not follow you . For you it is all the same whether you call them ( towards guidance and truth ) or you remain silent .
Surely those ( idols ) whom you worship besides Allah are also slaves ( of Allah ) just like you . So when you call on them , they should answer you if you are true ( in making them gods ) .
Do they have feet to walk with or hands to hold with or eyes to see with or ears to hear with ? Say : ( O disbelievers ! ) Call your ( false ) partners ( for my destruction ) . Then execute ( your ) plot against me and do not give me any respite .
Indeed my Helper is Allah Who has revealed the Book and He is the One Who also protects and helps the pious .
And the ( idols ) whom you worship besides Him have no power to help you , nor can they help themselves .
And if you call them towards guidance , they cannot ( even ) hear . And you see these ( idols ; they are sculptured in such a way ) as if they were looking at you whereas they do not see ( anything ) .
( O Esteemed Beloved ! ) Adopt forbearance , always command piousness , and keep aloof from the ignorant .
And , ( O man , ) if some evil impulse from Satan provokes you ( against these matters ) , seek refuge with Allah . Undoubtedly , He is All - Hearing , All - Knowing .
Surely those who have adopted piety , when some temptation from Satan touches them , they retrospect ( the dos and donts of Allah and the wickedness and hostility of Satan ) . So , the eyes ( of their insight ) open up at the same instant .
And ( as for ) the brothers of these satans , they draw them deeper into error ( by whispering suspicions ) and do not slacken ( in promoting mischief and bloodshed ) .
And when you do not bring them any Sign ( then ) they say : Why have you not brought it contriving yourself ? Say : I just follow that ( command ) which is revealed to me from my Lord . This ( Quran ) is a ( collection ) of conclusive Proofs and Guidance and Mercy from your Lord for those who believe .
And when the Quran is recited , listen to it attentively and observe silence so that mercy may be bestowed upon you .
And remember your Lord in your heart with humility and tearful submissiveness and fear and repentance , and also by calling in low tones . ( Persevere with His remembrance ) morning and evening and be not of the neglectful .
Indeed the ( angels ) who are close in the Presence of your Lord ( never ) turn away from His worship in arrogance , and glorify Him ( all the time ) and remain prostrate before Him .
( O Esteemed Messenger ! ) They ask you about the spoils of war . Say : The spoils belong to Allah and the Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) . So , fear Allah and keep your mutual matters set aright , and obey Allah and His Messenger if you are believers .
The believers are only those whose hearts , when Allah is mentioned ( before them ) , are filled with awe ( at the very idea of Allahs Greatness and Might ) . And when His Revelations are recited to them , they ( i . e . the ecstatic , delightful , sweet and sublime Words of the Beloved ) increase their faith , and they ( maintain ) their trust in their Lord alone ( under all circumstances and do not look towards anyone other than Him ) .
( They ) are those who establish Prayer and spend ( in the cause of Allah ) out of whatever We have bestowed upon them .
It is they who are ( in fact ) the true believers . For them are ( high ) ranks with their Lord and forgiveness and an honourable provision .
( O Beloved ! ) As your Lord brought you forth from your home ( to fight ) for ( the great cause of ) Truth while a section of the believers was unhappy ( about it ) .
They started disputing with you about the cause of Truth even after disclosure ( of the good news that help from Allah would arrive and the forces of Muhammad would triumph [ blessings and peace be upon him ] ) , as if they were being driven towards death and could see ( death with their eyes ) .
And ( recall the time ) when Allah promised you that dominance and victory over one of the two groups of ( the disbelievers of Makka ) would certainly be yours . And you desired that the ( group ) without weapons ( the weaker one ) should fall into your hands , but Allah willed to establish the Truth by His Words and cut off the roots of the disbelievers ( might and splendour through the Muslims victory over the enemys bigger and well - equipped troops ) .
So that ( the battle of Badr ) might establish ( through this great victory ) the Truth as Truth and falsehood as false , even though the wicked might dislike ( this decisiveness of the armed conflict between the forces of Truth and falsehood ) .
( Remember ) when you were supplicating your Lord ( for support ) and He granted your supplication ( and said : ) I am going to help you with a thousand angels coming in succession .
And Allah made this ( form of help ) merely a good news in order that your hearts are reassured thereby . And ( in truth ) there is no ( other ) help except the help from Allah . Indeed Allah alone is Almighty , Most Wise .
When He brought upon you drowsiness to ( provide you ) feeling of peace and security from Himself and sent down upon you water from the heavens to provide you ( inward and outward ) purity by that and remove from you the filth of Satans ( heretic suspicions ) and invigorate your hearts with ( the strength of certitude ) and with that make your feet ( unshakably ) firm .
( O Esteemed Beloved ! Call to mind also the majestic sight of your glory ) when your Lord revealed to the angels the message : I am ( also ) with you ( to support the Companions of the Messenger ) . So , keep the believers firm - footed and steadfast ( by good news and support ) ; I cast terror and dread ( of Muhammads forces [ blessings and peace be upon him ] ) into the hearts of the disbelievers right now . So , strike at the nape of ( the disbelievers ) necks and crush all their tendons and joints .
That is because they defied Allah and His Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) . And he who defies Allah and His Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) , then surely Allah is to seize ( him ) with severe torment .
This is ( the torment in this world ) , so taste it ( first ) , and surely there is ( another ) torment of Hell ( as well ) for the disbelievers ( in the Hereafter ) .
( O Believers ! ) When you combat the disbelievers ( in the battlefield ) , never turn your backs on them ( even if they are ) a large army .
And he who turns his back on them that day , except he who is maneuvering in fight or he who wants to join one of his own troops ( for support ) , certainly he returns with the wrath of Allah and Hell is his abode and that is ( the most ) evil abode .
( O soldiers of the Army of Islam ! ) It is not you who killed the disbelievers but it is Allah Who killed them , ( and , O Glorious Beloved , ) when you smote ( them with pebbles ) , it was not you who smote them but Allah smote , ( so ) that He confers upon the believers great favours from Him . Allah is indeed All - Hearing , All - Knowing .
This is ( one favour and bestowal ) , and ( the other is that ) Allah does weaken the plots and deceitful strategies of the disbelievers .
( O disbelievers ! ) If you sought a decisive victory then the victory ( of the Truth ) has certainly reached you . It will be best for you if you desist ( even now ) . But if you opt for the same ( mischief ) We shall ( also ) afflict you with the same ( punishment ) and your army , may it be of any large size , will not be of any avail to you . And Allah is surely on the side of the believers .
O Believers ! Obey Allah and His Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) and do not turn away from him while you are hearing .
And do not be like those who said ( by way of betraying ) : We have heard , whereas they do not hear .
Surely the worst of the living creatures in the sight of Allah are the deaf and the dumb who ( neither listen to nor speak the Truth and ) also do not understand ( the Truth ) .
And had Allah known even a little ( inclination towards ) good in them , He would ( certainly ) have made them hear . But ( their state of mind is such that ) if He makes them hear ( the Truth ) , they will ( even then ) turn away , and they are those who are averse ( to the Truth ) .
O Believers ! Whenever the Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) calls you for some assignment that brings you ( eternal ) life , present yourselves ( immediately ) , responding to Allah and His Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) with submissiveness and obedience . And bear in mind that Allah intervenes between man and his heart ( with a Glory of exclusive nearness ) , and that all of you will ( ultimately ) be gathered towards Him .
And fear the plague which will not afflict exclusively those who are the tyrants among you ( but its victims will also include those who are accomplices in tyranny or who remain indifferent to it ) . And bear in mind that Allah is Severe in inflicting torment .
And ( call to mind the time ) when ( numerically ) you were small ( i . e . in the minority , in the Makkan period , ) and oppressed in the country ( i . e . economically unstable and victims of exploitation ) . You were ( also ) afraid that ( the powerful ) people would snatch you away ( i . e . socially too you were neither free nor secure ) . So , ( after migration to Madina He ( Allah ) provided for you a free and secure abode and strengthened you with His help ( through Islamic rule and power ) and supplied you with sustenance of pure and wholesome things ( through brotherhood , spoils of war and free economy ) so that you may give thanks to Allah ( by means of absolute submission to Allahs Commands ) .
O Believers ! Do not betray the trust of Allah and His Messenger ( [ blessings and peace be upon him ] in paying them what is their due ) , nor betray your mutual trusts while you know ( the whole truth ) .
And bear in mind that your riches and your children are nothing but a trial and that with Allah alone lies the highest reward .
O Believers ! If you adopt the fear of Allah ( then ) He will set for you a criterion ( and guidance ) to distinguish between Truth and falsehood and will wipe out your sins from your ( record ) and will forgive you . And Allah is the Lord of Great Bounty .
And when the disbelievers were engaged in hatching secret conspiracies against you to captivate you or slay you or banish you ( from the country on the one side ) , they were plotting intrigues , and ( on the other ) Allah was planning His strategy ( to thwart their intrigues ) . And Allah is the Best of the Secret Planners .
And when Our Revelations are recited to them they say : Of course , we have heard . If we desire , we can also compose Verses analogous to that ( Word ) . These are ( nothing ) but the ( imaginary ) tales of the ancients .
And when they said ( sarcastically ) : O Allah ! If this ( Quran ) is really the Truth from Your side , then rain down upon us stones from the sky ( for disobeying it ) or seize us with some grievous torment .
And , ( in truth , the matter is that ) it is not Allahs Glory to torment them while , ( O Venerable Beloved , ) you are also ( present ) among them . Nor will Allah torment them while they are engaged in supplicating Him for forgiveness .
And what might be any other reason that Allah should not punish these ( disbelievers of Makka now after your emigration to Madina ) while they hinder people from the Sacred Mosque ( Kabatullah ) and they do not deserve to be its guardians ( or custodians ) as well ? Its friends ( i . e . guardians ) are but the righteous people , but most of them do not know ( this truth ) .
And their ( so - called ) Prayer at the House of Allah ( Kaba ) is nothing more than whistling and clapping hands . So taste the torment because you used to disbelieve .
Undoubtedly the disbelievers spend their wealth ( in order to influence and ) prevent people from the path of Allahs Din ( Religion ) . So , presently , they will continue spending it , but later ( this spending ) will become for them a source of regret ( i . e . repentance and despondency ) . They will then be overpowered ( by Allahs seizure ) , and those who have adopted disbelief will be driven towards Hell .
So that Allah may separate the impious from the pious and put the impious ( filthy characters ) one over the other and heap them all up together and then cast this ( heap ) into Hell . It is they who are the losers .
Say to those who disbelieve : If they desist ( from their blasphemous acts ) then the ( sins ) which have passed before will be forgiven . But if they repeat the same then the pattern of ( multiple punishments given to ) the forerunners has passed . ( They will also be dealt with the same way . )
And , ( O people of Truth , ) continue your fight against these ( chieftains of oppression and terrorism for the establishment of enduring peace ) , until there does not ( remain ) any disruption and Din ( the system of compliance with law and promoting the phenomena of life ) is devoted to Allah alone . And if they desist , then Allah is surely seeing well ( the action ) that they are accomplishing .
But if they turn away ( from obeying Allah ) , then bear in mind that surely Allah alone is your Excellent Protector ( Patron ) ; what an Excellent Protector ( Patron ) and what an Excellent Helper !
And bear in mind that whatever spoils of war you seize , a fifth of it is for Allah and the Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) and ( the Messengers ) kindred and orphans and the needy and the wayfarers if you believe in Allah , and in that ( Revelation ) which We sent down on Our ( exalted ) Servant on the Day of Decision ( discrimination between the truth and falsehood ) , the day ( when ) the two armies ( of the believers and the disbelievers ) encountered ( in the battlefield of Badr ) . And Allah has Absolute Power over everything .
When you were on the nearer bank of the valley ( the Madina side ) and they ( the disbelievers ) on the farther bank ( the other side ) and ( the mercantile ) caravan was below you ; and had you made some mutual appointment ( to fight ) , you would certainly have reached there ( at the timings ) different from ( your ) appointment . ( But Allah brought you face to face at the same time without any appointment . ) This took place in order that Allah might lead that matter to completion which was destined to happen , so that he who had to die might die ( with a manifest ) evidence to that effect , and he who had to survive might continue to live ( with a manifest ) evidence to that effect ( i . e . the evidence be established for all on the Truthfulness of Islam and the Holy Messenger [ blessings and peace be upon him ] ) . Allah is surely All - Hearing , All - Knowing .
( Recall that episode ) when Allah showed you in your dream ( the army of ) the disbelievers as small in number . And if He ( Allah ) had shown ( them ) to you as greater in number then , ( O Muslims , ) you would have felt dispirited and certainly disputed among yourselves on the question ( of war ) . But Allah saved the Muslims ( from timidity and mutual discord ) . Indeed He is Well Aware of the ( secrets of ) hearts .
And ( also remind them of the sight ) when He , at the time of encounter ( as well ) , made ( the troops of ) the disbelievers appear small ( just ) in your eyes and made you appear small in their eyes ( so that both the armies remain high alert to fight ) in order that Allah leads to completion the ( total defeat of disbelievers resulting from the full - fledged war ) which had been preordained ( by Allah ) . And ( eventually ) all matters are returned to Allah alone .
O Believers ! When you encounter any ( enemy ) army , stand firm and remember Allah abundantly so that you may attain to success .
And obey Allah and His Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) and do not quarrel among yourselves lest ( growing disunited and weak ) you become timid and your impact ( power ) loses ground ( before your enemy ) . So be steadfast . Surely Allah is with those who are steadfast .
And be not like those who came out of their homes exhibiting false pride and showing off to the people and who hindered ( the people ) from the path of Allah . And Allah has encompassed ( with His Knowledge and Power ) all the activities they are doing .
And when Satan made the actions of these ( disbelievers ) appear attractive to them and he said ( to them ) : None of the people ( can ) overpower you today and I am certainly your protector ( helper ) . But when both the armies stood ( face to face ) against each other , he turned on his heels and said : I am indeed averse to you . Certainly I see what you do not see . Surely I fear Allah , and Allah is Severe in punishing .
And ( also call to mind the time ) when the hypocrites and those in whose hearts is the disease ( of disbelief ) were saying : The Din ( Religion ) of these ( Muslims ) has made them arrogant a great deal . But ( the truth is that ) he who trusts Allah ( then Allah is the Sustainer of all his matters ) . Surely Allah is Almighty , Most Wise .
And you ( will wonder ) if you see ( the spectacle ) when the angels take away the souls of the disbelievers . They continue striking their faces and backs ( with hammers , and say ) : Taste the torment of the Fire ( of Hell ) .
This ( torment ) is in retribution of those ( impious acts ) which your hands have sent forward , and Allah does not at all do injustice to His servants .
( The case of these disbelievers is also like that of ) the people of Pharaoh and those who preceded them . They ( too ) denied the Revelations of Allah . So , Allah seized them ( with torment ) for their sins . Surely , Allah is Mighty , Severe in afflicting torment .
This ( torment ) is because Allah never changes any blessing that He grants affluently to some people till they change their blessed state themselves ( i . e . when they commit ingratitude , disobedience and sins and even lose the sense of loss they are seized by destruction and devastation ) . Allah is indeed All - Hearing , All - Knowing .
This ( torment too ) is on the pattern of the people of Pharaoh and those who preceded them : they ( also ) denied the Signs of their Lord . So , We destroyed them due to their sins and We drowned the people of Pharaoh ( in the river ) . And they all were oppressors .
Surely , worse than ( even ) all the beasts in the sight of Allah are the people who disbelieve . So they do not come to believe .
They are the ones from whom you took promise ( many a time ) , but they break their promise every time and do not fear ( Allah ) .
So if you come upon them in the battlefield , then by killing them ( for violating peace treaty ) in an exemplary manner , make those ( also ) run on their heels who are behind them , so that they may learn a lesson of warning .
And if you apprehend treachery from a people , then throw their promise back to them on the basis of equality . Indeed Allah does not like the treacherous .
And let not the disbelievers ever assume that they have escaped ( safe and sound ) . Assuredly they can never make ( Us ) powerless .
And , ( O Muslims , ) muster up as much might as you can ( in the form of weapons and equipment of war ) and ( also formations ) of war steeds ( i . e . war mounts to combat ) them . Cause terror with this ( war readiness ) amongst the enemy of Allah and your enemy , and also those besides them whose ( secret enmity ) you know not ; Allah knows them . And whatever you spend in the way of Allah , you will be paid back in full , and you will not be done any injustice .
And if they ( the disbelievers ) incline to reconciliation , you also incline to it and put your trust in Allah . Surely He alone is All - Hearing , All - Knowing .
And if they seek to deceive you , then surely Allah is Sufficient for you . He is the One Who has given you strength with His help and with the believers .
And ( He is the One Who ) awakened mutual love among the hearts of the ( Muslims ) . If you had spent whatever exists in the earth , you could never have inculcated this ( love ) in their hearts ( with all these material resources ) . But Allah roused that love among them ( through a spiritual relation ) . Allah is indeed Almighty , Most Wise .
O ( Glorious ) Messenger ! Sufficient for you is Allah and those Muslims who have committed themselves to follow in your footsteps .
O ( Venerable ) Messenger ! Motivate the believers to fight ( i . e . prepare them to fight for the Truth ) . If there are twenty of you firm and steadfast ( in the event of war ) , they will overpower two hundred ( disbelievers ) and if ( one ) hundred of you are ( steadfast ) , they will overpower ( one ) thousand of the disbelievers because they do not have the concept ( of the Hereafter and its great reward . So , they cannot fight with that zeal and enthusiasm which the believers are charged with , because they have sold their souls for Paradise and the pleasure of Allah . )
Allah has , at present , lightened the burden ( of His Commandment ) on you . He knows that there is ( some degree of ) weakness in you . So ( now after mitigation the Command is ) that if there are ( one ) hundred resolute and steadfast ( men ) from amongst you , they will overpower two hundred ( disbelievers ) . And if there are ( one ) thousand of you , they will triumph over two thousand ( disbelievers ) by the Command of Allah and Allah is with those who remain steadfast . ( This is a target fixed for the believers and the minimum possible effect the vehemence of their faith should realize in the battlefield . )
This is not a Messengers glory that he should have ( disbelievers as ) prisoners of war , until he has let much of the blood of these ( mischief - monger terrorist militants ) in the land . You ( people ) desire the riches of the world , and Allah intends ( prosperity in ) the Hereafter and Allah is Almighty , Most Wise .
Had there not been a prior decree ( Command for forgiveness ) from Allah , a terrible torment would indeed have seized you for ( the ransom ) that you procured ( from the prisoners of Badr ) .
So eat of the lawful and wholesome spoils of war you have obtained and keep fearing Allah . Surely , Allah is Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
O Messenger ! Say to the prisoners of war who are in your hands : If Allah knows any good in your hearts , He will bestow on you better than that ( wealth ) which has been taken from you ( as ransom ) , and He will forgive you . And Allah is Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
And , ( O Beloved , ) if they want to betray you so they have certainly betrayed Allah before this ( as well ) . And , ( for the same reason ) He has placed some of them under ( your ) authority . And Allah is All - Knowing , Most Wise .
Indeed those who have embraced faith and have emigrated ( for the cause of Allah ) and have fought in the way of Allah with their material as well as human resources , and those who have provided ( the immigrants ) with shelter and helped ( them ) , it is they who are real friends of one another . And those who have believed ( but ) have not emigrated ( for Allah ) you do not owe anything to them for their friendship till they emigrate . And if they seek from you help in ( matters of ) Din ( Religion ) , it will be your duty to help them , except against a people between whom and you there is a ( peace ) treaty . And Allah is Most Vigilant to all ( the works ) that you are doing .
And those who disbelieve are the allies of one another . ( O Muslims ! ) If you do not extend ( to one another ) the same ( help and cooperation for the cause of Allah ) , then great mischief and disruption ( for the dominance of infidelity and falsehood ) will break out in the land .
And those who believed and emigrated and fought in the cause of Allah and those who provided shelter ( to those who sacrificed their households and homeland in the cause of Allah ) and helped ( them ) are the people who are in fact true Muslims . They are the ones for whom is forgiveness and an honourable provision .
And those who believed afterwards , and left their homes ( sacrificing ) in the cause of Truth , and joined you in fighting , they are ( also ) from amongst you . And ( as for inheritance and affinity with blood relations ) the relatives have a higher claim on one another in the Book of Allah . Surely Allah knows best everything .
Absolution ( renunciation ) is declared from Allah and His Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) to those polytheists with whom you had made a treaty ( of reconciliation and peace , and they did not fulfil the treaty ) .
So , ( O polytheists , ) you may move about in the land ( for ) four months . ( You will have to face war on expiry of this term ) . And bear in mind that you cannot at all weaken Allah , and surely Allah is the Abaser of the disbelievers .
( These Verses ) are a ( public ) declaration from Allah and His Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) for all mankind on the day of the Great Pilgrimage that Allah is absolved of all obligations to the polytheists , and His Messenger [ blessings and peace be upon him ] too ( is free from all obligations to them ) . So , ( O polytheists , ) if you repent that is better for you , but if you turn away then know that you cannot at all make Allahs strategy ineffective . And , ( O Beloved , ) warn the disbelievers of a grievous torment .
Except those idolaters with whom you made an agreement , who then did not show any latitude ( in executing the treaty ) and who did not support ( or reinforce ) anyone against you . So fulfil the treaty with them till the end of the term . Surely Allah loves those who fear Him .
So when the sacred months have passed , then kill the idolaters ( for the violation of peace treaty ) wherever you find them and capture them , imprison them and lie in wait for them at every place of ambush ( to catch and besiege them ) . So , if they repent , establish Prayer and start paying Zakat ( the Alms - due ) , then leave their way open . Surely , Allah is Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
And if any of the idolaters seeks asylum with you , provide him with protection until he listens to the Words of Allah . Then escort him to his haven . This is because these people do not possess the knowledge ( of the Truth ) .
( How ) can there be a promise for the polytheists with Allah and His Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) except for those with whom you have made a treaty near the Sacred Mosque ( at Hudaibiya ) ? So as long as they remain true to ( the treaty with ) you , you remain true to them . Surely , Allah loves those who fear Him .
How ( can one expect from them honouring of the agreement ? ) They are in such a state that if they overpower you they will have regard neither for any tie of kinship with you nor for any covenant . They please you with lip service only , but their hearts deny ( all what they say ) . And most of them are those who break agreements .
They gained a paltry price ( in terms of worldly interests ) for the Revelations of Allah and then started hindering ( people ) from His path ( of Din [ Religion ] ) . Indeed it is an extremely evil activity which they keep doing .
They have no regard either for a tie of kinship or a covenant in respect of a Muslim , and they are the people who have exceeded limits ( in disobedience ) .
( Even ) then if they repent and establish Prayer and pay Zakat ( the Alms - due ) they are your brothers in Din ( Religion ) . And We elucidate ( Our ) Revelations in detail for those who possess knowledge and understanding .
And if after making promise they break their oaths and taunt you with sarcasm in your Din ( Religion ) , then wage war against ( those ) chieftains of disbelief . Surely their oaths are not worth any regard , so that they desist ( from their mischief - mongering ) .
Will you not fight a people who broke their oaths and decided to banish the Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) while the first time it is they who triggered against you ( war and violation of the agreement ) ? Do you fear them ? But Allah has more right that you should fear Him , provided you are believers .
Fight against them ( to eliminate militancy and terrorism ) . Allah will torment them at your hands and will humiliate them , and will help you ( in your fight ) against them , and will heal the breasts of the believers .
And He will sublimate distress and fury in their hearts , and will accept repentance of whom He wills . And Allah is All - Knowing , Most Wise .
Do you think that you will be spared ( without passing through troubles and hardships ) , while Allah has not ( yet ) made distinctly known those amongst you who have fought in the way of Allah and ( who ) have not taken anyone as a confidant besides Allah and His Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) and the believers ? And Allah is Well - Aware of the deeds that you do .
It is not for the polytheists to maintain and frequent the mosques of Allah whereas they themselves bear witness to their disbelief . All their deeds have become void and in Hell will they dwell forever .
Only he who believes in Allah and the Last Day and establishes Prayer and pays Zakat ( the Alms - due ) and who fears none but Allah can maintain and frequent the mosques of Allah . So they alone are expected to become the rightly guided .
Do you consider ( mere ) serving of drinking water to the pilgrims and the management of populating and maintaining the Sacred Mosque ( an act ) equal to ( the works of ) a person who believes in Allah and the Last Day and fights in the cause of Allah ? They cannot be equal in the sight of Allah and Allah does not guide those who do injustice .
Those who have believed and have emigrated and have consistently toiled hard in the cause of Allah with their material and human resources enjoy very high rank in the Presence of Allah , and it is they who have achieved the ultimate goal .
Their Lord gives them glad tidings of Mercy from Him and of ( His ) pleasure and of ( those ) Gardens for them in which there are eternal delights .
They will reside therein forever . Surely , with Allah is the mighty reward .
O Believers ! Do not take your fathers ( and forefathers ) and brothers for friends if they love disbelief more than belief . And whoever of you befriends them , it is they who are the wrongdoers .
( O Esteemed Messenger ! ) Say : If your fathers ( and forefathers ) and your sons ( and daughters ) and your brothers ( and sisters ) and your wives and your ( other ) kith and kin and the riches that you have earned ( so hard ) and the trade and business that you fear may decline and the homes you are fond of are dearer to you than Allah and His Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) and struggling in His cause , then wait until Allah brings His command ( of torment ) . And Allah does not guide the disobedient .
Assuredly , Allah has helped you on a great many occasions and ( in particular ) on the day of Hunain , when superiority of your ( numerical strength ) exhilarated you . Then that ( numerical superiority ) could not prove to you of any avail and the earth , despite its vast expanse , narrowed for you , and then you turned your backs in retreat .
Allah then sent down His Tranquillity ( Mercy ) upon His Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) and the believers and sent down ( such ) armies ( of angels ) that you could not see . And He tormented those who were engaged in disbelief ; and that is the punishment of the disbelievers .
Then even after this Allah accepts repentance of the one He wills ( i . e . He blesses him with an aptness for Islam and His Merciful Eye ) . And Allah is Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
O Believers ! The polytheists are an embodiment of impurity . So let them not come closer to the Sacred Mosque after this year of theirs ( i . e . after victory over Makka in 9 A . H . ) . If you fear poverty ( due to decline in your trade ) then ( do not worry ) . Allah will soon enrich you from His Bounty if He so wills . Surely , Allah is All - Knowing , Most Wise .
( O Muslims ! ) Fight ( also ) those of the People of the Book who do not have faith in Allah and the Last Day , and do not consider unlawful the things which Allah and His Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) have declared unlawful , and do not adopt the True Din ( [ Religion ] of Islam ) until they give in and surrender ( to the Command of Islam ) , and pay the capitation tax with their own hand after having been subdued .
And the Jews said : Uzayr ( Ezra ) is the son of Allah , and the Christians said : The Messiah is the son of Allah . These are their ( absurd ) utterances that they voice with their mouths . They ( acquire ) resemblance with the saying of those who have disbelieved before ( them ) . May Allah ruin them ! Where are they wandering distracted ?
They took their priests and monks for lords besides Allah and ( also ) the Messiah , son of Maryam ( Mary ) , while in truth they had not been given ( any ) command except to worship ( only ) the One God besides Whom there is no God . Holy is He far above those that they associate with Him as partners .
They desire to extinguish the Light of Allah by blowing through their mouths . And Allah rejects ( it ) but ( wills ) to manifest His Light to its fullness , even though the disbelievers dislike ( it ) .
Allah is He Who sent His Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) with guidance and Din ( Religion ) of Truth to make him ( the Messenger ) dominant over every ( other exponent of ) Din ( Religion ) though much to the dislike of polytheists .
O Believers ! Indeed the majority of the priests and monks ( of the People of the Book ) devour the wealth of the people through unfair ( means ) and hinder from the path of Allah ( i . e . fill their safes with peoples money and hinder it from being spent for the publicity and promotion of the True Din [ Religion ] ) . And those who hoard silver and gold and do not spend it in the cause of Allah , warn them of a grievous torment .
The Day when this ( gold , silver and wealth ) will be heated in the Fire of Hell , their foreheads , sides and backs will be branded with this ( heated material , and it will be said to them : ) This is the same ( wealth ) that you treasured for ( the benefit of ) your souls . So taste ( this wealth ) which you had been amassing .
Indeed the number of months with Allah has been ( inscribed as ) twelve in the Book of Allah ( i . e . permanent Law of Nature ) since the Day He created the ( system of ) the heavens and the earth . Of these four months ( Rajab , Dhul - Qada , Dhul - Hijja and Muharram ) are sacred . This is the right Din ( Religion ) . So do not wrong your souls during these months ( by initiating and involving yourselves in fighting and war ) and fight against all the idolaters ( in retaliation ) the same way as they all fight against you ( allied ) , and bear in mind that Allah is surely with the Godfearing .
Postponing and deferring ( the sacred months ) is just an addition to disbelief . By this the disbelievers are led astray ; they , in one year , count it lawful and in another year regard it forbidden to complete the count ( of the months ) which Allah has made sacred and ( also ) make that ( month ) lawful which Allah has declared unlawful . Their evil deeds have been made attractive to them and Allah does not guide the community of disbelievers .
O Believers ! What is the matter with you that when you are asked to set out ( to fight ) in the way of Allah you , weighing heavier , bend towards ( the material and ignoble world of ) the earth ? Are you pleased with the life of this world rather than the Hereafter ? So , the property and belongings of the life of this world are worthless in ( comparison with ) the Hereafter ( and carry ) but little ( value ) .
If you do not move out ( to fight for the promotion of peace and human dignity ) , He will afflict you with grievous torment and will replace you with another people and you will not be able to do Him any harm . And Allah has Mighty Power over everything .
If you do not help him ( the Holy Messenger of Allah in the struggle for the dominance of Islam , then what ! ) . Indeed Allah helped him ( also at the time ) when the disbelievers drove him away ( from Makka , his homeland , ) while he was the second of the two ( immigrants ) . Both ( the Messenger [ blessings and peace be upon him ] and Abu Bakr ) were in the cave ( of Mount Thawr ) when he said to his Companion ( Abu Bakr ) : Do not grieve . Allah is surely with us . So , Allah sent down His serenity upon him and strengthened him by means of such armies ( of angels ) that you could not see and He made the word of the disbelievers the lowermost and Allahs Word is ( always ) the uppermost and exalted . And Allah is Almighty , Most Wise .
Light or heavy , march forth ( under all circumstances ) and fight in the cause of Allah with your material and human resources . It is better for you if you are ( reality ) conscious .
Had the benefit ( booty ) been a near gain and the journey ( of fighting ) easy and moderate then they ( i . e . the hypocrites ) would certainly have followed you . But ( that ) arduous journey appeared to them far too long . And they would ( now ) swear by Allah soon : Had we been able to go , we would certainly have marched forth with you . They are drawing upon themselves ( added ) destruction ( by these lies ) , and Allah knows that they are liars beyond doubt .
Allah safeguard ( protect and exalt ) you ! Why did you permit them ( to stay back , not to participate in war ) , till those who were speaking the truth would be exposed to you and you would ( also ) know the liars ?
Those who believe in Allah and the Last Day will not seek from you ( this ) permission that they should ( not ) fight with their possessions and lives . And Allah knows the Godfearing full well .
Only those who do not believe in Allah and the Last Day and whose hearts are in doubt will seek leave ( exemption from fighting ) from you . So in their doubt they are bewildered , lost in disorientation .
If they had ( really ) resolved to move out ( for fighting ) they would have procured ( at least some ) equipment for that . But ( the fact is that owing to their falsehood and hypocrisy ) Allah disliked ( even ) their rising up ( for fighting ) . So , He stopped them ( there ) . And it was said to them : Sit in the company of those who sit ( shirking from fight ) .
If they had come out ( joining you ) , they would have added nothing to you except mischief and disorder and would have strived hard amongst you ( to stir up disaffection and discord ) . They want to bring about subversion within you and ( even now some of ) their spies are there among you . And Allah is Well Aware of the wrongdoers .
The truth is that they have been trying to cause subversion earlier too , and have been contriving schemes to upset your programmes until the Truth came and the Decree of Allah prevailed , though they disliked ( it ) downright .
And among them is ( also ) he who says : Accord me permission ( to stay back home instead of going to fight ) and put me not into trial . Listen , they have plunged ( themselves ) into trial and assuredly Hell has encompassed the disbelievers .
If some good ( or some comfort ) betides you it grieves them , but if some adversity ( or trouble ) befalls you then they say : We had adopted ( precaution in ) our work in advance , and they turn away rejoicing .
( O Beloved ! ) Say : Never shall ( anything ) befall us but what Allah has prescribed for us ; He alone is our Protector . And in Allah alone the believers should put their trust .
Say : Are you waiting for simply one of the two good fortunes in our favour ( i . e . victory or martyrdom : whether we are martyred or return victorious ) ? And we are waiting in your favour ( in view of your hypocrisy ) to see Allah afflict you with ( special ) torment either from Himself or at our hands . So wait . We ( too ) are waiting with you ( to see whose wait comes out to be productive ) .
Say : Spend willingly or unwillingly , this ( money ) will not be accepted from you at all . You are indeed a disobedient people .
And there is nothing that stands in the way of acceptance of their spending ( i . e . charity donations ) except that they deny Allah and His Messenger [ blessings and peace be upon him ] and come to offer Prayer but lazily and unwillingly and ( also ) they do not spend ( in the cause of Allah ) but feeling displeased .
So neither their wealth nor their children should amaze you . It is for these ( things ) only that Allah intends to punish them in the life of this world and that their souls may depart while they are in a state of disbelief .
And ( they are so cowardly that ) they swear by Allah that they are of you while they are not of you . But they are those who fear ( the disclosure and outcome of their hypocrisy . So they appear to be Muslims as make - believe ) .
( Their state of mind is such that ) could they find a place of refuge or a cave or a crevice in the earth , they would turn towards it running very fast ( and would not stay with you even for a moment , but they are under compulsion right now so they show off their untrue loyalty ) .
And some among them are those who pass sarcastic remarks against you in the matter of ( distribution of ) alms . If they are given some portion of ( the alms ) they feel pleased , but if nothing is given to them they feel annoyed at once .
How good it would have been if they had felt pleased with what Allah and His Messenger [ blessings and peace be upon him ] had given them and said : Sufficient for us is Allah . Allah will soon confer on us His Bounty and so will His Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) bestow ( in addition ) . Indeed we are inclined to Allah alone . ( And the Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) is His mediator ; in fact his bestowal is Allahs . Had they developed this belief and refrained from sarcasm , it would have been better . )
Indeed alms ( Zakat ) are meant for the poor and the indigent , and those who are deployed to collect charities and those in whose hearts the inculcation of love for Islam is aimed at . And , ( moreover , spending Zakat for ) freeing of human lives ( from the yoke of slavery ) and removing the burden of those who are to pay debt and ( those who toil hard ) in the cause of Allah and the wayfarers ( is true ) . This ( all ) has been prescribed by Allah and Allah is All - Knowing , Most Wise .
And among these ( hypocrites ) are also those who hurt ( the Esteemed ) Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) and say : He is only an ear ( believes everything he hears ) . Say : He is all ears to what is good for you ; he believes in Allah and has faith in ( what ) the believers ( say ) and is mercy for those of you who have embraced faith . And those who hurt the Messenger of Allah ( by means of their evil beliefs , doubts and foul tongue ) for them is grievous torment .
O Muslims ! They ( the hypocrites ) swear by Allah before you to keep you pleased whereas Allah along with His Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) has a greater right that they should please Him . If they are the believers , ( they should have known this fact and should have pleased the Messenger [ blessings and peace be upon him ] . Allah is pleased only if the Messenger [ blessings and peace be upon him ] is pleased because their pleasure is but one and the same ) .
Do they not know that he who opposes Allah and His Messenger , the Fire of Hell is ( destined ) for him wherein he will live forever ? There is no humiliation greater than this .
The hypocrites feel scared that a Sura ( chapter ) will be sent down to the Muslims and that will make them aware of those matters that are ( hidden ) in the hearts ( of the hypocrites ) . Say : Continue mocking . Surely Allah is about to reveal that ( matter ) which you are scared of .
If you ask them , they will certainly say : We used only to talk ( away the journey ) and enjoy . Say : Were you mocking Allah , His Revelations and His Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) ?
( Now ) do not make excuses . You have certainly become disbelievers after ( showing that ) you believed . If We forgive a party of you , ( even then ) We shall torment the other party because they sinned .
The hypocrites , men and women , are one from another ( alike ) . They command evil and forbid good and are close - fisted ( in the matter of spending in the cause of Allah ) . They have forgotten Allah , so Allah has forgotten them . It is indeed the hypocrites who are disobedient .
Allah has promised the hypocrites , men and women , and the disbelievers the Fire of Hell in which ( they ) will live forever . That ( Fire ) will suffice them . And Allah has cast His curse upon them , and for them is torment that will last forever .
( O Hypocrites ! ) You are like those who preceded you . They were far mightier than you in power and far richer in possessions and progeny . They benefited by their share ( of the world ) ; so are you enjoying your portion ( the same way ) as your predecessors enjoyed their fixed share ( of the worldly pleasures ) . Moreover , you ( too in like manner ) have indulged deep in falsehood as they indulged deep in falsehood . Their works have gone fruitless in this world and in the Hereafter , and they are the ones who are the losers .
Has not the news reached them of those who were before them - the people of Nuh ( Noah ) , Ad and Thamud and the people of Ibrahim ( Abraham ) and the citizens of Madyan and the dwellers of the towns which were overturned ? Their Messengers ( too ) came to them with clear Signs ( but they disobeyed ) . So , it was not Allahs glory to wrong them , but it was they who used to wrong themselves ( because of rejecting the Truth ) .
The believers , men and women , are helpers and friends to one another . They command good and forbid evil and establish Prayer and pay Zakat ( the Alms - due ) and obey Allah and His Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) . It is they on whom Allah will soon shower His Mercy . Surely Allah is Almighty , Most Wise .
Allah has promised the believers , men and women , Gardens with streams flowing beneath . They will dwell therein forever . And ( He has also promised ) such blessed mansions as are located at a special site in Paradise amidst evergreen Gardens , and ( then ) the greatest ( bliss of all ) is the Pleasure and Acceptance of Allah ( which will be awarded as a mighty compensation ) . This indeed is the highest achievement .
O ( Glorious ) Messenger ! Fight against the disbelievers and the hypocrites and treat them harshly ( for violating peace and human rights ) . And Hell is their abode and that is an evil abode .
( These hypocrites ) swear by Allah that they have not said ( anything ) , whereas they have definitely uttered blasphemy and have become disbelievers after ( showing ) their belief in Islam . They intended ( many tortures too ) that they could not achieve . And ( out of Islam and the Messengers conduct ) they could not disdain anything , except that Allah and His Messenger had made them affluent with His Bounty . So if they repent ( even now ) , it will be better for them , but if they remain averse ( the same way ) , then Allah will afflict them with grievous torment ( both ) in ( the life of ) this world and in the Hereafter and they will not have any helper or friend on earth .
And among these ( hypocrites ) are also ( some ) who made a promise with Allah : If He bestows upon us ( riches ) out of His Bounty , we shall certainly give alms ( in His Way ) and become of the righteous .
So when He conferred on them ( wealth ) out of His Bounty , they became miserly with it and turned back retracting from ( their promise ) .
So He made hypocrisy in their hearts a consequence ( of their own niggardliness ) till the Day when they would meet Him , because they violated the promise they had made with Allah and ( also ) because they used to tell lies .
Do they not know that Allah is aware of their secrets and their whisperings and that Allah knows best all unseen things ?
The people who accuse ( of pretentiousness and compulsion ) those of the believers who give alms happily and willingly in ( their ) charity works , and also ( blame ) those ( destitute Muslims ) who find nothing ( more to give ) except for their toil and hard work , and ( also ) mock their ( sentiment for spending in the cause of Allah ) , Allah will punish them for their scoffing and there is for them a grievous punishment .
Whether or not you seek forgiveness for these ( wicked and arrogant hypocrites who dare scoff at your eminence ) , if you implore forgiveness for them seventy times ( out of your natural compassion and your benevolent practice of forgiving and forbearing ) , even then Allah will not forgive them at all because they have rejected Allah and His Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) and Allah does not guide the rebels .
( These hypocrites ) who stayed back ( from fighting ) due to opposing Allahs Messenger are rejoicing over their sitting behind . They disliked it that they should strive in the cause of Allah with their wealth and their lives and said : Do not move out in this heat . Say : The Fire of Hell is fiercer in heat by far . ( How good it would be ) if they could only understand !
So they should laugh for a while and weep for long ( because they will have to weep for long in the Hereafter ) as a recompense for what they used to earn .
So , ( O Beloved , ) if Allah again takes you back to a party of these ( hypocrites , after getting free from the battle of Tabuk , ) and they seek your permission to go forth ( for fight in the event of some future conflict ) , then say to them : ( Now ) you shall never go forth with me , nor shall you ever fight an enemy accompanying me ( because , abandoning the sacred struggle , ) you rejoiced over sitting behind the first time . So , ( this time as well ) stay behind along with those who remain behind .
And never perform ( funeral ) Prayer over any of these ( hypocrites ) who dies , nor stand at his grave ( because your stepping on some place also brings about mercy and blessings , and they do not deserve your mercy and blessing ) . Indeed they disbelieved Allah and His Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) and died as defiant .
Let not their riches and their progeny make you wonder . Allah wants only to torment them in this world ( too ) by means of these things and that their souls may depart while they are ( still ) disbelievers .
And when ( such ) a Sura ( chapter ) is revealed : Believe in Allah and fight in the cause of Allah along with His Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) , the affluent and the influential amongst them seek leave from you and say : Leave us . We shall remain with those who sit ( behind ) .
They liked that they would be with those women , children and the handicapped who would stay behind . And their hearts have been sealed , so they do not understand anything .
But the Messenger [ blessings and peace be upon him ] and those who believed with him fight in the cause of Allah with their material and human resources . And for them are all good things and they are the ones who will achieve their goal .
Allah has prepared for them Gardens beneath which streams flow . They are their permanent residents . This indeed is a colossal achievement .
And a few feigners from among the desert nomads came ( to the Holy Messenger to submit excuse ) so that they might ( also ) be accorded permission , and those who lied to Allah and His Messenger ( [ blessings and peace be upon him ] in their claim to be the believers ) stayed behind ( having forsaken fight ) . Those of them who denied the Truth would soon be seized by torturous torment .
There is no sin on the aged ( weak ) and the sick , nor on those who are not so ( affluent ) that they may spend while they are most sincerely and truly devoted to Allah and His Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) . No way can the righteous ( i . e . the spiritually excellent ) be blamed and Allah is Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
Nor can ( anyway be scoffed or blamed ) those who presented themselves to your service ( with the purpose ) that you may arrange for them mounts ( for fighting , because they did not posses any means of conveyance ) . So you said : I ( also ) do not find any ( additional means ) to mount you on . Then ( with your permission ) they returned in such a state that their eyes were streaming with tears in grief ( of being deprived of fighting in the cause of Allah : Alas ! ) They did not have ( that much ) wealth which they could spend ( and manage to take part in the holy fight ) .
( Blame ) lies only on those who seek your permission though they are affluent . They feel pleased to remain with the women and the handicapped who stay behind . Allah has sealed their hearts , so they do not understand ( what is the true loss or gain ) .
( O Muslims ! ) When you return to them ( from the expedition of Tabuk ) they will offer their apologies to you . ( O Beloved ! ) Say : Do not make excuses ; we will not at all believe you . Allah has informed us about your state of affairs . Now ( in future ) Allah as well as His Messenger will monitor your performance ( in the world ) . Then ( in the Hereafter too ) you will be returned to ( the Lord ) Who knows everything hidden and manifest and He will make you know ( all your works ) that you used to do .
Now they will swear to you by Allah when you return to them so that you may excuse them . So be indifferent to them . Surely they are unclean and Hell is their abode , a reward for what they used to earn .
They swear to you so that you may feel pleased with them . So , ( O Muslims , ) if you are pleased with them ( even ) then Allah will not be pleased with the disobedient people .
( These ) nomad villagers are unyielding disbelievers and incorrigible hypocrites . And ( due to their stubbornness in disbelief and hypocrisy ) they deserve to remain ignorant of those limits and commandments which Allah has sent down to His Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) . And Allah is All - Knowing , Most Wise .
And among these nomad villagers there is ( also ) one who regards that ( money ) which he spends ( in the cause of Allah ) as a compulsory fine , and looks forward to the spinning evil ( of miseries and misfortunes ) coming upon you . But it is they whom the evil spin ( of calamity and ill - fortune ) is going to whirl . And Allah is All - Hearing , All - Knowing .
And ( yet ) among these nomads there is ( also ) one who believes in Allah and the Last Day and considers whatever he spends ( in the way of Allah ) as a means of nearness to Allah and receiving ( merciful ) supplications of the Messenger . Listen ! Assuredly it is a source of nearness to Allah . Allah will soon admit them to His Mercy . Surely Allah is Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
The pioneer emigrants and their supporters ( Ansar ) , the vanguard of the believers , and those who follow them in the grade of spiritual excellence Allah is well pleased with them ( all ) and they ( all ) are well pleased with Him . And He has prepared for them Gardens with rivers flowing under them . They will live in them forever . This is indeed a colossal achievement .
And , ( O Muslims , ) some among the nomad villagers around you and some citizens of Madina as well are hypocrites . They are adamant about hypocrisy . ( So far ) you know them not ; We know them . ( Later , the Holy Messenger was also given the knowledge and gnosis ( of all the hypocrites . ) Soon shall We torment them twice ( here in this world ) . Then they will be turned towards greater torment ( on the Day of Rising ) .
And there are others ( who ) have confessed their sins . They have mixed up good deeds with some bad ones ( by mistake ) . Allah will , most likely , accept their repentance . Surely , Allah is Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
Collect from their wealth alms ( Zakat the Alms - due ) so that by these ( alms ) you may purify them ( of their sins ) and ( by this purification of faith and riches ) bestow upon them blessing and pray for them . Surely your prayer is a ( source of ) delightful calm for them . And Allah is All - Hearing , All - Knowing .
Do they not know that indeed He is Allah alone Who accepts repentance of His servants and takes charity donations ( i . e . Zakat and alms with His own Mighty Hand ) and that Allah is the One Who is Oft - Relenting , Ever - Merciful ?
And say : Do work . Allah as well as His Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) and the believers ( too ) will soon see your work . And you will shortly be returned to ( the Lord ) Who knows everything veiled and unveiled . So He will inform you of the works that you used to do .
And there are ( yet ) others who are deferred , left to the ( next ) Command of Allah . He will either torment them or accept their repentance . And Allah is All - Knowing , Most Wise .
And ( from among the hypocrites there are also those ) who have erected a mosque to harm ( the Muslims ) and ( promote ) disbelief and disunite the believers and as an ambush for the one who is already at war against Allah and His Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) . They will surely swear : We have intended nothing but good ( by constructing this mosque ) . And Allah bears witness that they are certainly liars .
( O Beloved ! ) Never stand in this ( building which has been built in the name of a mosque ) . But the mosque which has been , from the very first day , founded on the fear of Allah has greater right to be honoured with your standing in it . There are people in it who love to remain purified ( both physically and spiritually ) , and Allah loves those who commit themselves to purity .
Who is better the one who founds his edifice ( i . e . mosque ) on the fear of Allah and ( His ) pleasure and satisfaction or the one who lays the foundation of his building on the edge of a crumbling precipice ? So , that ( building ) tumbled down with its architect into the Fire of Hell ? And Allah does not guide the wrongdoers .
Their structure which they have raised ( in the name of a mosque ) will continue pricking their hearts ( due to doubt and hypocrisy ) , except that their hearts are torn to pieces ( due to persistently piercing concern ) . And Allah is All - Knowing , Most Wise .
Surely , Allah has bought from the believers their souls and wealth in return for Paradise for them . ( Now ) they fight in the way of Allah . So they kill ( for the Truth ) and are slain ( themselves too . Allah has taken ) the firm promise as a bountiful obligation on Him in the Torah , the Gospel ( the Injil ) and the Quran . And who is truer to his promise than Allah ? So , ( believers , ) rejoice over your bargain against which you have sold ( your souls and wealth ) . This is but a colossal achievement .
( These believers who have bargained with Allah for the Hereafter are those ) who turn to Allah in repentance , worship , praise and glorify ( Allah ) , fast , abstain from the worldly lusts , bow down before Him ( most humbly and submissively ) and prostrate themselves before Him ( seeking His nearness ) , command good and forbid evil and guard the limits ( set ) by Allah . And give glad tidings to these believers .
It is not the glory of the Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) and the dignity of the believers that they pray for forgiveness of the polytheists , even though they are kindred , after it has become clear to them that they ( the polytheists ) are the inmates of Hell .
And Ibrahims ( Abrahams ) praying for his fathers ( i . e . Azar , his uncle who brought him up ) forgiveness was only due to the promise that he had made to him . But when it became evident to him that he was an enemy of Allah , he parted with him ( dissociated himself from him and never prayed for him afterwards ) . Surely Ibrahim ( Abraham ) was most compassionate ( tender - hearted , tearful ) and profoundly forbearing .
And it is not Allahs Glory to lead a people astray after guiding them aright , until He makes clear to them the things which they should guard against . Surely Allah knows best everything .
Verily He is Allah to Whom belongs the Sovereignty of the heavens and the earth . He ( is the One Who ) gives life and causes death . And besides Allah there is for you no friend or helper ( who can support you against Allahs Command ) .
Surely Allah turned in His Mercy towards the Messenger ( Allah bless him and give him peace ) and ( also ) towards the Emigrants and the Helpers who followed him ( even ) in the hour of distress ( of the battle of Tabuk ) , after ( the situation emerged wherein ) the hearts of a party of them had nearly deviated . Then He turned towards them with Bestowal and Mercy . Allah is indeed Most Compassionate and Ever - Merciful towards them .
And ( He also turned towards ) those three persons ( with Merciful Compassion ) whose ( decision ) was deferred until when the earth , despite all its vastness , closed in upon them and their ( own ) souls ( too ) became cumbersome for them , and they knew for sure that there is no refuge from ( the torment of ) Allah except in ( turning towards ) Him . Allah then inclined towards them in Bestowal and Kindness so that they ( too ) might persevere with repentance and inclination . Surely Allah is the One Who is Most Relenting , Ever - Merciful .
O Believers ! Fear Allah persistently and remain in the ( company ) of those who uphold the Truth .
It was unbecoming the people of Madina and the villagers ( inhabitants ) of suburbs to lag behind ( stepping aside ) from Allahs Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) , nor to feel for their own souls greater concern than his ( blessed and sacred ) soul . This ( command ) is because in the cause of Allah ( whatever ) thirst they suffer , ( whatever ) turmoil they undergo , ( whatever ) hunger they endure , and stepping on a track where treading rouses violent reaction among the disbelievers and whatever they receive from the enemy ( killing and injury or spoils of war ) : in recompense of everything is recorded but a good deed to their credit . Surely , Allah does not waste the reward of the righteous .
They ( who fight in the cause of Allah ) do not spend any amount small or great , nor do they journey through a valley but that ( all this expense and journey ) is written down for them so that Allah may confer on them the best reward ( for every such act ) that they used to do .
And it is not possible for all the Muslims to set out ( together ) . So , why should a party from within every group ( or tribe ) not go forth in order that they may acquire deeper knowledge ( i . e . thorough understanding and insight ) of Din ( Religion ) , and warn their people when they return to them so that they may guard themselves ( against a life of sins and disobedience ) .
O Believers ! Fight against those of the disbelievers who are around you ( i . e . who are damaging you and your Din [ Religion ] directly ) . And ( fight in a way and at a time that ) they find in you toughness ( of might and valour ) . And bear in mind that Allah is with those who guard themselves against evil .
And whenever a Sura ( chapter ) is revealed , some of these ( hypocrites ) say ( mischievously ) : Whose faith amongst you has this ( Sura ) increased ? So , this ( Sura ) has increased the faith of those who have embraced faith and they rejoice ( over this boosted state of faith ) .
But those whose hearts are diseased , this ( Sura ) has added vileness ( and impurity ) to their filth ( disbelief and hypocrisy ) . And they died as disbelievers .
Do they not see that they are put in trouble once or twice every year ? ( Even ) then they do not repent , nor do they take advice .
Whenever a Sura ( chapter ) is revealed , they look at one another ( and inquire through body language : ) Is there anyone watching you ? Then they turn away . Allah has turned their hearts away because they are the ones who lack understanding .
Surely a ( Glorious ) Messenger from amongst yourselves has come to you . Your suffering and distress ( becomes ) grievously heavy on him ( blessings and peace be upon him ) . ( O mankind , ) he is ardently desirous of your ( betterment and guidance . And ) he is most ( deeply ) clement and merciful to the believers .
If ( in spite of all these favours and blessings ) they ( still ) deviate , then say : Enough for me is Allah . There is no God but He . I have reposed my trust in Him alone and He is the Lord of the Mighty Throne .
Alif , Lam , Ra . ( Only Allah and the Messenger [ blessings and peace be upon him ] know the real meaning ) . These are the Verses of the Book which is all wisdom .
Is it amazing for the people that We sent down Revelation to a ( perfect ) man from among themselves : Warn ( the disoriented and distracted ) people ( of Allahs torment ) and give glad tidings to the believers that there is high rank ( i . e . exalted status ) for them in the Presence of their Lord . ? The disbelievers said : Indeed this person is an evident magician .
Certainly , your Lord is Allah Who created the heavens and the earth ( the upper and lower strata of the universe ) in six days ( i . e . aeons or phases , step by step ) . Then He settled Himself on the Throne ( befitting His Glory with His supreme authority , i . e . after the creation of the universe He established His Command and Control by enforcing His law and system in all the worlds and heavenly bodies ) . He is the One Who devises strategies for all operations ( i . e . makes everything function under a system ) . There is no one to intercede ( with Him ) without His permission . ( The Glorious and Mighty ) Allah is the One Who is your Lord ; worship Him alone . So , do you not think over ( accepting His Direction and Guidance ) ?
( O people ! ) It is to Him that you all are to return ; ( that ) is Allahs true promise . Surely He is the One Who originates the creation . Then He is the One Who will repeat it so that He rewards with justice those who believe and do righteous works . And those who reject faith and disbelieve , there is for them scalding water to drink and painful torment , a reward for their disbelief .
He is the One Who has made the sun ( a source of ) light and ( with that ) made the moon shine , and appointed for it stages ( to appear smaller or bigger ) so that you might compute the number of years and the count ( of time ) . Allah has not created ( all this ) but with a zero - defect strategy . ( Through these cosmic realities ) He expounds in detail the Signs ( of His Creativity , Unicity and Might ) for those who possess knowledge .
Surely in the alternation of night and day and in ( all ) that Allah has created in the heavens and the earth there are ( in like manner ) Signs for those who live by Godwariness .
Verily those who do not expect to meet Us and are pleased with the worldly life and are well contented with it and who are neglectful of Our Signs .
It is they whose abode is Hell , a recompense for the deeds they used to earn .
Indeed those who believe and practise piety consistently , their Lord will take them , for their faith , ( to the Gardens ) with streams flowing ( under their abodes , located ) in the Gardens of Bliss in the Hereafter .
( Finding these blessings and bounties , ) they will pray in these ( Gardens ) : Holy You are , O Allah ! and the word of their mutual greetings will be : Peace . ( Or the word for their reception from Allah and the angels will be : Peace . ) And their supplication will end ( with these words ) : All praise belongs to Allah , the Lord of all the worlds .
If Allah were to hasten evil ( i . e . torment ) for the ( disbelieving ) people , as they make haste for the worldly gains , then certainly their term ( of life ) would have been ( hastily ) completed for them ( so that they reach Hell fast after dying ) . But We leave those who do not expect to meet Us in their rebellion ( and revolt ) so that they keep wandering disoriented .
And when a misery touches ( such a ) man , he calls out to Us while lying on his side or sitting or standing . But when We remove from him his affliction , he passes on ( forgetting Us ) as if he ( never ) called out to Us in pain that had touched him . This is how the ( wrong ) deeds which the transgressors do are made to appear to them fascinating .
And indeed before you ( also ) We destroyed ( a number of ) communities when they perpetrated injustice . And their Messengers brought to them clear Signs but they would not believe . That is how We punish the evildoers ( for their impious behaviour ) .
Then , after them , We made you ( their ) successors in the land so that We might observe how you would behave ( now ) .
And when Our enlightening Revelations are recited to them , those who do not believe in meeting Us say : Bring us a Quran different from this one or alter it . ( O Glorious Messenger , ) say : I have no right to modify it of my own accord . I follow only ( that ) which is revealed to me . I indeed fear the chastisement of the Mighty Day if I go against my Lord .
Say : Had Allah so willed , I would not have recited this ( Quran ) to you , nor would He ( Himself ) have made it known to you . I have indeed spent a ( part of ) life among you ( even ) before this ( revelation of the Quran ) . So do you not understand ?
So who is more unjust than one who fabricates lies against Allah or belies His Revelations ? Certainly the evildoers will never triumph .
And ( the idolaters ) worship , apart from Allah , those ( idols ) which can neither harm nor benefit them and ( in justification of their false worship ) they say : These ( idols ) are our intercessors with Allah . Say : Do you seek to inform Allah of the ( fabricated ) presumption ( of intercession by idols ) whose ( existence ) He is not aware of either in the heavens or on in the earth ( i . e . intercession with Him by any idol is not in His knowledge ) ? Holy is He and Exalted far above those whom they set up as ( His ) peers .
And the entire mankind was one Umma ( [ Community ] in the beginning ) . Then they ( differed among themselves and ) disintegrated . And if it had not been decreed by your Lord ( that the torment would not be hastened ) , the matters would have been settled between them in which they disagree .
And ( now ) they say ( because of the same respite ) : Why has some ( decisive ) Sign not been sent down to this ( Messenger [ blessings and peace be upon him ] ) from his Lord ? Say : The unseen is for Allah alone . So wait . I too am with you among those who wait .
And when We make the people relish ( Our ) Mercy after they are afflicted with distress , their plotting immediately begins against Our Signs ( consigning Our Favour to oblivion ) . Say : Allah is Swift to punish intrigues . Surely the angels We have sent keep writing whatever plots you contrive .
He is the One Who ( enables ) you to travel through land and sea , until when you board the vessels , and they ( the vessels ) carrying the passengers sail with the favourable wind , they rejoice over it . But ( all of a sudden ) a violent wind overtakes them ( the vessels ) , and ( the mounting ) waves surge ( towards ) those ( aboard ) from all sides . And they start thinking that they are ( now ) besieged by them ( the waves . At that time ) they call out to Allah ( with the mind ) that they sincerely devote their Din ( Religion ) to Him alone ( and submit : O Allah , ) if You deliver us from this ( monstrous torment , ) we shall certainly become among ( Your ) grateful servants .
But when Allah delivers them , they take no time to go unjustly rebellious in the land ( as before ) . O people ( rebelling against Allah ! The havoc caused by ) your rebellion and revolt is directed only towards your own souls . ( You may gain ) some benefit of the worldly life but ultimately you have to return to Us . Then We will make you well aware ( of your works ) that you have been doing .
The example of the worldly life is like water which We sent down from the sky . Then owing to this there came forth from the earth thick growth of vegetation which both men and cattle feed on , until when the earth took its ( full ) bloom and beauty and became fully embellished , and its inhabitants thought that ( now ) they had full control over it , then ( emergently ) Our command ( of torment ) seized it by night or by day and We made it mown down ( the way ) as if it did not even exist the day before . That is how We elucidate Our Signs to those who apply reason .
And Allah calls towards the Home of Peace ( Paradise ) , and guides whom He wills to the straight path .
For those who do pious works there is good recompense rather more ( added to it ) . And neither ( dust and ) darkness nor humiliation and disgrace will cover their faces . It is they who are the people of Paradise , its permanent residents .
And those who have earned evil , the recompense of evil ( for them ) will be a matching evil and humiliation and ignominy will spread over them . There will be no one to rescue them from ( the torment of ) Allah . ( It will appear ) as if their faces have been covered by dark patches of night . It is they who are the inmates of Hell , its permanent residents .
And the Day when We gather them all together , We shall say to the polytheists : Remain at your respective places , you and your partners ( false gods ) . Then We shall disunite them and their ( sculptured ) partners will say ( to them ) : It was not we that you used to worship .
So , sufficient is Allah as witness between us and you , for we were ( certainly ) unaware of your worship .
At that ( horrifying ) stage everyone will assess ( the reality of the works ) which he sent forward , and they will be returned to Allah , Who is their Real Master , and that fabrication of lies that they used to practise will vanish from them .
Say ( to them ) : Who provides you with sustenance from the heaven and the earth ( i . e . from above and beneath ) ? Or Who is the master of your ears and eyes ( i . e . hearing and sight ) ? And Who brings forth the living from the dead ( i . e . animate from inanimate ) and Who brings forth the dead from the living ( i . e . inanimate from animate ) ? And Who manages ( all the cosmic systems ) ? They will promptly say : Allah . Then say : So do you not fear ( Him ) ?
So ( the Lord of Glory and Might ) Allah alone is your true Lord . So what else can there be apart from ( this ) Truth except going astray ? Then , distracted , where are you being turned away ?
That is how the judgment of your Lord is proved true against the defiant that they will not believe .
Inquire ( of them ) : Is there any of your ( so - called ) partner - gods that originates creation , then restores it ( after total annihilation of life ) ? Say : Allah alone initiates creation ( bringing life into existence from nonentity ) , then He is the One Who will repeat it ( as well ) . So where are you wandering disoriented ?
Inquire ( of them ) : Is there any of your ( so - called ) partner - gods that may lead to the Truth ? Say : Allah alone guides to the Truth ( Din [ Religion ] ) . Then who has greater right to be obeyed He who guides to the Truth or he who himself does not find the way unless he is shown the way ? ( i . e . it should be carried from one place to the other as the disbelievers used to carry their idols as and when required . ) So what has gone wrong with you ? How do you decide ?
Most of them follow only conjecture . Surely , conjecture cannot in the least substitute the Truth . Assuredly , Allah knows best what they do .
This Quran is not such as could be devised without ( the Revelation of ) Allah . Rather ( it ) validates those ( Books ) which have been ( revealed ) before it , and is an exposition of whatever ( Allah ) has written ( on the Tablet or in the Commandments of Sharia ) . There is not even an iota of doubt in its ( trueness ) . It is from the Lord of all the worlds .
Do they say : The Messenger has fabricated it himself ? Say : Then bring forth any ( one ) Sura like it , and call on ( for your help ) all you can besides Allah , if you are truthful .
The truth is that they are denying that ( Word of Allah ) whose knowledge they failed to encompass , and its truth had ( also ) not yet manifested before them vividly . Those who have passed before them also denied ( the Truth ) the same way . So see how the wrongdoers met their fate !
Among them there is someone who will believe in it and some other who will not believe in it . And your Lord knows them full well who rouse mischief .
And if they belie you , then say : For me is my work and for you is your work . You are not accountable for what I do , and I am not accountable for what you do .
And there are some among them who ( apparently ) lend you their ears , but will you make the deaf hear even though they do not have a little capability to understand ?
There are some among them who ( apparently ) look towards you . Will you make the blind see the path even though they have no sight ?
Surely Allah does not do injustice to the people in the least , but they ( themselves ) do injustice to their souls .
And the Day when He gathers them ( they will feel ) as if they had not stayed in the world but for an hour of the day . They will recognize each other . Losers indeed are those who denied the meeting with Allah , and they were not the rightly guided .
And whether We show you ( in the world ) some portion of that ( torment ) which We promise them ( and We shall execute it during your holy lifetime , ) or We make you depart this life ( before that ) , they ( in any case ) are to return to Us . Then Allah ( Himself ) is witness to what they are doing .
And there has been coming one Messenger for every Umma ( Community ) . So , when their Messenger came ( with clear Signs , but even then they did not believe , ) then judgment was made among them with justice ( and exactly the same will happen on the Last Day ) . They will not be wronged .
And they say ( sarcastically ) : When will this promise ( of torment ) be ( fulfilled ? Tell us , O Muslims , ) if you are truthful .
Say : I am no master of any loss or profit for my own self except what Allah may will . A term is ( appointed ) for every Umma ( Community ) . When their ( appointed ) term comes , they can neither stay behind nor advance by a single moment .
Say : ( O disbelievers , ) just ponder : if His ( torment ) comes upon you ( all of a sudden ) by night or by day ( then what will you opt to do ) ? What is it that the evildoers want in haste ?
Will you believe in it when this ( torment ) will have befallen ? ( Then it will be said to you : You believe ) now ! ( Now it is of no avail ) while you ( sarcastically ) desired the same ( torment ) in haste .
Then it will be said to ( these ) wrongdoers : Taste the everlasting punishment . You will not be recompensed ( anything more ) but for the same ( deeds ) that you used to earn .
And they ask you : Is that matter of ( everlasting torment certainly ) true ? Say : Yes , by my Lord , it is certainly an absolute truth and you cannot frustrate ( Allahs plan by your denial ) .
If every evildoer possessed ( all ) that ( wealth ) which is in the earth , he would certainly offer it as ransom ( to get rid of ) the torment . ( But even then he will not be able to escape from the torment . ) And when ( such people ) see the torment , they will conceal their remorse . And judgment will be made among them with justice and they will not be wronged .
Know ! Whatever is in the heavens and the earth ( all ) belongs to Allah alone . Beware ! Indeed the promise of Allah is true but most of them do not know .
He is the One Who gives life and causes death and you will be returned to Him alone .
O mankind ! Surely , there has come to you an admonition from your Lord and a cure for all those ( diseases ) which are ( hidden ) in the breasts . And it is guidance and mercy ( too ) for those who are blessed with faith .
Say : ( All this ) is due to the Bounty and Mercy of Allah ( bestowed upon you through raising Muhammad [ Allah bless him and give him peace ] as the Holy Messenger ) . So the Muslims should rejoice over it . This is far better than ( all that affluence and wealth ) that they amass .
Say : Give your view : Allah sent down for you ( pure and clean ) provision , but you declared some of those ( things ) unlawful and ( others ) lawful . Say : Did Allah accord you ( its ) permission ? Or are you fabricating a lie against Allah ?
And what do those who fabricate lies against Allah think about the Day of Resurrection ? Truly Allah is Most Gracious to the people , but most of them are not thankful .
And , ( O Glorious Beloved , ) in whatever state you may be and whatever portion you may recite from the Quran , and , ( O Umma [ Community ] of Muhammad , [ blessings and peace be upon him ] ) whatever work you do , We witness and watch over you ( at the time ) when you are engaged in it . And not even the smallest particle in the earth or in the heaven is hidden from ( the knowledge of ) your Lord , And nor anything smaller or bigger than that ( smallest particle ) is there but ( recorded ) in the Clear Book ( the Protected Tablet , [ al - Lawhal - Mahfuz ] ) .
Beware ! Verily , the friends of Allah will not have any fear , nor will they grieve .
( They ) are the people who believe and ( always ) remain Godfearing , committed to piety .
There is for them the good news ( of honour and recognition ) in the life of the world , and ( also of forgiveness and intercession ) in the Hereafter . ( Or there are blessed spiritual visions in this world in the form of pious dreams , and in the Hereafter in the shape of effulgent disclosures of Allahs Absolute Beauty and Sight . ) The Commands of Allah never change . That is the colossal achievement .
( O Glorious Messenger ! ) Let not their ( hostile and malicious ) conversation grieve you . Surely all Grandeur and Authority belongs to Allah alone ( Who bestows upon whom He wills anything He may please ) . He is All - Hearing , All - Knowing .
Remember ! To Allah belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth . And those who worship ( idols ) besides Allah do not ( in fact ) follow ( even ) their ( own sculptured ) associate - gods . They follow but only ( their own ) assumption and conjecture , and they indulge in merely wrong guesswork .
He is the One Who has made the night for you so that you may rest and relax therein , and made the day bright ( so that therein you may do your work ) . Surely there are Signs in it for those who listen ( attentively ) .
They say : Allah has adopted a son ( for Himself , whereas ) He is Holy . He is Self - Sufficient . Whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth , all belongs to Him alone . You have no evidence with you of this ( false allegation ) . Do you attribute that ( thing ) to Allah which you ( yourselves ) do not know ?
Say : Surely those who fabricate lies against Allah shall not prosper .
There is ( but a few days ) enjoyment in this world . Then they are to return to Us . We shall then afflict them with severe torment as recompense for their disbelief .
And relate to them the account of Nuh ( Noah ) when he said to his people : O my people ( the children of Qabil [ Cain ] ) , if my stay and my admonition to you by Allahs Revelations annoy you , then ( bear in mind that ) I have put my trust in Allah alone ( and I am not afraid of you ) . Therefore , mature your plot ( against me ) jointly , and also ( make ) your ( sculptured ) partner - gods ( join in and think hard so that no aspect of ) your plot remains obscure to you ; then do ( whatever you feel like ) against me and do not give me any respite .
So if you have turned away ( from my admonition ) then I have not asked for any reward from you . My reward is only with ( the bountiful obligation of ) Allah , and I have been enjoined to observe perfect obedience and total submission ( to His Command ) .
Then his people belied him so We delivered him and those who were with him in the Ark ( from the torment of Deluge ) , and We made them successors ( in the land ) , and drowned those who denied Our Revelations . So , see how those who were warned met their fate !
Then ( how many a ) Messenger We sent after him towards their respective peoples ! They brought them clear Signs , but those people ( too ) did not prove such as would believe in that ( matter ) which they had already denied . That is how We seal the hearts of those who defy .
Then , after them , We sent Musa ( Moses ) and Harun ( Moses and Aaron ) with Our Signs to Pharaoh and his chiefs . But they displayed arrogance and they were people given to crimes .
So when the Truth came to them from Us , they said : Certainly this is clear sorcery .
Musa ( Moses ) said : Do you utter ( such remarks ) about the Truth when it has come to you ? ( Apply your reason and use vision and see ) if it is sorcery . And the sorcerers will never be able to prosper .
They said : ( O Musa [ Moses ] , ) have you come to us to turn us away from that ( way of life ) which we found our fathers ( following ) , and that the upper hand of you both should remain ( intact ) in the land ( of Egypt ) ? We are not the ones who will ever believe in you both .
And Pharaoh said : Bring to me every expert sorcerer .
So , when the magicians arrived , Musa ( Moses ) said to them : Throw ( all those things on the ground ) which you want to throw .
When they threw ( their strings and sticks ) , Musa ( Moses ) said : Whatever you have brought ( here ) is magic . Allah will surely prove it false right now . Certainly Allah does not set right the work of the mischief - mongers .
And Allah establishes the Truth by His Words , even though the evildoers continue to dislike it .
But except for a few youths from his people ( none ) believed in Musa ( Moses ) , owing to the fear of Pharaoh and their ( tribal ) chiefs and ( nobles ) , lest they should afflict them with ( some ) misery . And Pharaoh was indeed a tyrant in the land ( of Egypt ) and a transgressor . And certainly he was amongst those who exceed limits ( in oppression ) .
And Musa ( Moses ) said : O my people , if you have believed in Allah , then put your trust in Him alone if you are ( truly ) the believers .
They submitted : We have put trust in Allah alone . O our Lord , make us not a victim of the oppressors injustice .
And deliver us with Your Mercy from ( the dominance of ) the disbelieving people .
And We sent Revelation to Musa ( Moses ) and his brother : Prepare some houses for your people in ( the city of ) Egypt , and build these ( houses ) facing the Qibla ( direction for offering Prayer ) , and ( then ) establish Prayer and give the believers a glad tidings ( of victory and help ) .
And Musa ( Moses ) said : O our Lord , surely You have provided Pharaoh and his chiefs with the means of embellishment and ( abundance of ) riches and wealth in the life of the world . O our Lord , ( have You given them all this ) in order that they turn ( the people ) away from Your path ( sometime by tempting and sometime by terrifying them ) ? O our Lord , destroy their riches and make their hearts ( so ) callous that they may not believe even then , until they see the grievous torment .
( Allah ) said : The prayer of you both has indeed been granted . So remain steadfast both of you and follow not the path of those who do not possess knowledge .
And We took the Children of Israel across the sea . Pharaoh and his army chased them with rebellion , tyranny and oppression until when he ( Pharaoh ) was seized by drowning , he said : I believe that there is no god to be worshipped apart from ( God ) the Children of Israel have put faith in and I am ( now ) of the Muslims .
( Allah said : ) Now ( you believe ) while you have been ( persistently ) disobeying and defying before , and you were of those who spread disruption .
( O Pharaoh ! ) We shall today preserve your ( lifeless ) body so that you may become a Sign ( of warning ) for those who come after you . Indeed most of the people are neglectful ( in understanding ) Our Signs .
And We indeed provided the Children of Israel with a worthy place to dwell in and with pure and clean sustenance . They did not differ in anything , until knowledge and insight reached them . Your Lord will surely judge among them on the Day of Resurrection in matters wherein they used to differ .
( O listener ! ) If you have even a little doubt about this ( Book ) which We have revealed to you ( through Our Messenger [ blessings and peace be upon him ] ) , then inquire ( about its authenticity ) of those who have been reading the Book ( of Allah ) before you . The Truth has no doubt come to you from your Lord , so be not at all of those who doubt .
And never be of those who deny the Revelations of Allah lest you should become of the losers .
( O Glorious Beloved ! ) Indeed those against whom the judgment of your Lord has proved true will not believe .
Even though all Signs should come to them so much so that they see the painful torment ( as well ) .
Then why has there not been any town , except ( the town of ) the people of Yunus ( Jonah ) , that believed and its belief brought it profit ? When ( the people of Yunus [ Jonah ] ) believed ( just seeing the sign of torment before it was sent down ) , We removed from them the punishment of humiliation ( even ) in the life of the world and We let them avail the profit for a time .
And had Allah so willed , certainly all inhabitants on the earth would have believed . ( When your Lord has not made them believe by force , ) will you coerce the people until they become believers ?
And no soul has the capability to believe ( on its own ) without Allahs leave . He ( Allah ) places the impurity of disbelief on those who do not put their reason to work ( to grasp the truth ) .
Say : ( Just ) observe what Signs of Allahs Might are there in ( the boundless cosmos of ) the heavens and the earth . ( These ) Signs and ( the Messengers ) who warn the people ( of Allahs torment ) cannot benefit those who have no intension to believe .
Are they waiting for ( the bad days ) similar to those of the people who have passed away before them ? Say : Wait ( then ) ; I am ( also ) with you among those who wait .
We then save Our Messengers and also those who believe in the same manner . This ( provision ) is a bountiful obligation upon Us to save the believers .
Say : O people , if you are in any doubt ( about the authenticity of ) my Din [ Religion ] , then ( listen ) that I cannot worship those ( idols ) whom you worship besides Allah . But I worship that Allah Who causes you to die . And I have been commanded that I must ( always ) be from among the believers .
And that , guarding against every falsehood , ( with focused attention , ) keep your direction towards Din ( Religion ) and never be of those who associate partners with Allah .
( This Command is being communicated to Umma [ Community ] through the Messenger : ) Nor worship those ( idols ) besides Allah which can neither profit nor harm you . Then if you do it , you will surely be among the wrongdoers the same moment .
And if Allah afflicts you with some distress , then there is none who can remove it but He . And if He intends any good for you , then there is none who can repel His Bounty . He bestows His Bounty upon whomsoever of His servants He pleases . And He is Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
Say : O people , surely the Truth has come to you from your Lord . So whoever adopts the path of guidance , adopts it for his own good , and he who is misguided , goes astray for his own destruction . And I am not a custodian over you ( that I should bring you to the path of guidance coercively ) .
( O Messenger ! ) Follow the same that is revealed to you , and be steadfast until Allah gives His Judgment , and He is the Best of the judges .
Alif , Lam , Ra . ( Only Allah and the Messenger [ blessings and peace be upon him ] know the real meaning . This ) is ( that ) Book whose Verses are firmly founded ; then they have been explained in detail by ( the Lord ) Who is All - Wise , All - Aware .
That do not worship anyone but Allah . Verily , I am a Warner from Him ( Allah ) to you and a Bearer of glad tidings .
And that you should seek forgiveness from your Lord , then submit your repentance before Him ( with true heart ) . He will keep you glad and gratified with an excellent provision till an appointed term , and will reward for merit everyone enjoying merit ( i . e . will bestow reward and ranks corresponding to ones amount of righteous deeds and dedicated services ) . And if you turn away , then I fear for you the torment of a Mighty Day .
You are to return to Allah and He has Mighty Control over everything .
Bear in mind ! These ( disbelievers ) fold up their breasts so that they may hide ( the state of their hearts ) from Him ( Allah ) . Beware ! When they cover ( their bodies ) with their clothes ( even then ) He knows all those matters which they hide and which they lay open . Surely , He knows best ( the secrets of ) the hearts .
And there is no moving creature ( living being ) on the earth but ( that ) its sustenance is ( a bountiful obligation ) upon Allah . And He knows its resting - place and ( also ) the place where it is to be entrusted . Everything is ( recorded ) in the enlightening Book ( the Protected Tablet - [ al - Lawh al - Mahfuz ] ) .
And He ( Allah ) is the One Who created the heavens and the earth ( the higher and the lower strata of the universe ) in six days ( i . e . six phases or aeons of creation and evolution ) . And ( before the creation of the earth ) His Throne of Authority operated on water , ( and from that He brought forth all manifestations of life and created you , ) so that He might put you to trial to evaluate which of you would prove better conduct - wise . And if you say : You will be raised ( brought to life ) after death , the disbelievers will certainly say : This is nothing ( else ) but an obvious magic .
And if We defer their torment for a few fixed days , they will definitely say : What has held it back ? Beware ! The day when that ( torment ) comes upon them ( then ) that will not be averted from them , and that ( chastisement ) will beset them which they used to make fun of .
And if We make man taste Mercy from Us , then withdraw it from him ( for some reason ) , he becomes highly disappointed ( and ) ungrateful .
And if We make him taste ( some ) favour after the suffering that afflicted him , then he is sure to say : Gone are all my troubles . Surely , he ( becomes ) most exultant and boastful .
Except for those who remain steadfast and keep doing pious deeds . For them is forgiveness and great reward .
How may it be that you omit a portion of what has been revealed to you , and that your ( sanctified ) breast feels straitened ( by the idea that ) the disbelievers say : Why has any treasure not been sent down to him ( the Messenger [ blessings and peace be upon him ] ) or why has any angel not come with him ? ( O Glorious Messenger ! That is just impossible . ) You are but a Warner . ( You are neither to tempt someone nor to persecute . ) And Allah is a Guardian over everything .
Do the disbelievers say : The Messenger has fabricated this ( Quran ) himself ? Say : Bring then ten forged chapters like this , and call ( to your help ) whom you can except Allah if you are truthful .
( O Muslims ! ) So , if they do not accept your challenge , then firmly believe that the Quran has been revealed with Allahs knowledge , and that there is no other God but He . So , will you ( now ) stick to Islam ( firm - footed ) ?
Those who lust after the worldly life ( only , ) with its beauty ( and embellishment ) , We pay them back in full for their works here in this world and their ( worldly recompense ) is not diminished in the least .
They are the people for whom there is no ( share ) in the Hereafter except the Fire ( of Hell ) . And ( as for reward in the Hereafter ) all ( the works ) they did in the world have come to nothing , and ( all that ) they used to do is null and void ( because their account is cleared by paying them in full measure in the life of the world , and nothing remains in balance for the Hereafter ) .
He who holds fast to the Clear Proof from his Lord and a testimony ( the Quran ) too has come from his Lord for his strength and support , and prior to that the Book of Musa ( [ Moses ] the Torah ) , a guide and mercy ( too had come ) so , it is they who believe in it ( the Quran ) . Can ( he be equal to ) the one who denies ( the Quran ) from among ( the disbelieving ) sects while his abode is the Fire of Hell ? So , ( O listener ! ) be not in any doubt about it . Surely , this ( Quran ) is the Truth from your Lord , but most people do not believe .
And who can be a greater wrongdoer than the one who fabricates a lie against Allah ? Such people will be brought before their Lord and the witnesses will say : These are the ones who foisted a lie upon their Lord . Know that Allahs curse is upon the wrongdoers
Those who hinder ( others ) from the path of Allah and look for crookedness in it . And it is they who deny the Hereafter .
They have no capability at all to frustrate ( Allah ) on earth , nor are there any helpers for them apart from Allah . The torment will be doubled for them ( because ) they had neither courage to hear ( the Truth ) nor vision to see ( the Truth ) .
It is they who ruined their souls , and the lies they used to invent are ( all ) gone from them .
This is absolutely true that it is certainly they who will be the greatest losers in the Hereafter .
Verily those who believe and persist in pious works and humble themselves before their Lord , it is they who are the people of Paradise . They will live there forever .
The example of the two parties ( the disbelievers and the believers ) is like the blind and the deaf ( versus ) the seeing and the hearing . Are both the cases equal ? Will you not take advice ( even ) then ?
And surely We sent Nuh ( Noah ) ) to his people . ( He said to them : ) I am ( raised and appointed as ) a plain Warner to you .
That you worship none but Allah . I fear the torment of a grievous day ( coming ) upon you .
So the disbelieving chiefs and nobles of his people said : You appear to us but a human like ourselves , and we have not seen any ( honourable person ) following you except the most inferior and lowest of ( our society ) having superficial opinion ( who have become your followers without using discretion ) . Nor do we find in you any merit and superiority over us ( i . e . power and authority , wealth and riches or the worthy people joining your party or for that matter , any such prominent feature ) . Instead , we consider you to be liars .
Nuh ( Noah ) said : O my people , what is your view : if I stick to a Clear Proof from my Lord and He has also granted me His ( exceptional ) Mercy from Himself but that has been veiled from you ( like the blind ) , can we force it upon you coercively while you despise it ?
And , O my people , I do not ( also ) demand from you any wealth for ( promoting and preaching this message ) . My reward is only ( a bountiful obligation ) upon Allah . Nor shall I drive away ( for your sake ) these ( poor and backward ) people who have accepted faith . ( Do not consider them inferior . It is they who are in fact superior and respectable . ) Surely they are those who will be blessed with meeting with their Lord , and truly I find you an ignorant ( and insensible ) people .
And , O my people , if I drive them away then who will come to my help ( to rescue me ) from ( the wrath of ) Allah ? Do you not reflect ?
And I do not say ( this ) to you : I have treasures of Allah ( i . e . I am a very rich person ) ; nor do I know of the unseen on my own ( without Allahs Revelation ) . Nor do I say : I am an angel ( not a man . My message is not based on charismatic claims ) . Nor do I say pertaining to those who are inferior in your eyes : Allah will not award them any good at all ( that is Allahs command and everyones share ) . Allah knows best what is in their hearts . ( If I were to say that , ) surely I shall be among the wrongdoers the same moment .
They said : O Nuh ( Noah ) , indeed you have disputed with us and disputed much . So now bring upon us that ( torment ) which you promise us if you are ( really ) truthful .
Nuh ( Noah ) said : Allah alone will bring upon you that ( torment ) if He so wills and you cannot hinder ( Him ) .
And even if I resolve to counsel you , my counsel ( too ) will not benefit you if Allah wills to lead you astray . He is your Lord and you will be returned to Him alone .
( O Glorious Messenger ! ) Do they say : The Messenger has fabricated this ( Quran ) himself ? Say : If I have fabricated it , then I shall have to bear ( the resulting torment of ) my sin . And I am free of the sin that you are perpetrating .
And it was revealed to Nuh ( Noah ) : None of your people will ( now ) believe ( any more ) except those who have ( so far ) believed . So you should not grieve over their ( belying and mocking ) activities .
And build an Ark before Our Eyes in compliance with Our instructions , and do not converse with Me ( about anything ) pertaining to the wrongdoers . They will surely be drowned .
And Nuh ( Noah ) set himself to building the Ark . And whenever the chiefs of his people passed by him , they would scoff at him . Nuh ( Noah ) would say ( in reply ) : If you are mocking us ( today ) , we shall also mock you ( tomorrow ) as you are mocking us .
So you will soon learn upon whom comes ( in this very world the torment ) that will disgrace and humiliate him and ( then whom ) the torment that will last forever befalls ( in the Hereafter too ) .
Until when Our Command ( of torment ) came and the oven started gushing ( like fountains , then ) We said : ( O Nuh [ Noah ] , ) get aboard the Ark a pair of animals ( male and female ) of every species and ( take in ) your family also except those against whom the Command ( of destruction ) has already gone forth , and whoever has believed ( take him also with you ) . And , except a few , none had believed with him .
Nuh ( Noah ) said : Get into the Ark ; in the Name of Allah will it sail and anchor . Surely my Lord is Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
And the Ark kept sailing , carrying them through ( violent ) waves towering like mountains . Then Nuh ( Noah ) called out to his son , who had separated from him ( and was standing with the disbelievers ) : O my son , get aboard with us and do not stay with the disbelievers .
He said : ( Instead of embarking on the Ark ) I shall just now take shelter on some mountain . That will save me from the Deluge . Nuh ( Noah ) said : None can save today from Allahs punishment except someone to whom He ( Allah ) shows His Mercy . In the meanwhile , a ( violent ) wave came between both ( father and son ) . So he was one of the drowned .
( And when all were drowned and annihilated except Nuhs [ Noahs ] Ark ) it was commanded : O earth , swallow up your water and , O sky , cease pouring . And the water was dried and the Command was executed and the Ark came to rest on Mount al - Judi and it was said : Far away are the unjust ( from Mercy ) !
And Nuh ( Noah ) called out to his Lord and submitted : O my Lord , indeed my son ( too ) was a part of my family and certainly Your promise is true , and You are the Greatest of all rulers .
( Allah ) said : O Nuh ( Noah ) , indeed he is not included in your family because his actions were not righteous . So do not ask Me a question ( about matters ) of which you have no knowledge . I admonish you lest you should become amongst the unwise .
Nuh ( Noah ) submitted : O my Lord , I seek refuge with You from asking You that of which I have no knowledge . And if You forgive me not and bestow ( not ) mercy on me ( then ) I shall be of the losers .
He was commanded : O Nuh ( Noah ) , get down ( from the Ark ) with peace and blessings from Us on you and on the ( kingdoms , classes and ) species that are with you . And there will ( also ) be ( classes and ) species ( in future again ) whom We shall provide with ( the worldly favours ) ; then a painful torment will come upon them from Us .
This ( narration ) is of the accounts of the unseen that We reveal to you . Neither you nor your people knew them before this . So observe patience . Surely it is the Godfearing with whom it ends well .
And to the people of Ad ( We sent ) their ( kinship ) brother Hud . He said : O my people , worship Allah . You have no God other than Him . You merely invent a lie against Allah ( of having a partner ) .
O my people ! I do not demand of you any recompense for this ( promotion and preaching of the message ) . My reward is ( a bountiful obligation ) upon Him Who has created me . Do you not apply your mind ?
And , O people , seek forgiveness of your Lord ( for your sins ) , then turn towards Him ( with true hearts ) . He will send upon you copious downpour from the sky and will add strength to your strength . So , do not turn away from Him becoming sinners .
They said : O Hud , you have not brought us any clear proof . Nor are we going to forsake our gods at your behest and nor are we to believe in you .
We can say nothing except that some of our gods have afflicted you with ( mental ) disorder . Hud said : Indeed I call Allah to witness , and you too bear witness that I have no concern with those whom you associate as partners with Allah .
Except for Him ( Allah ) , join in to hatch ( some ) plot against me all of you ( including your false gods ) , then grant me no respite ( as well ) .
Surely I have put my trust in Allah Who is my Lord ( as well as ) your Lord . And there is not a moving ( living ) creature but He holds it by its forelock ( i . e . is completely in the grip of His Mighty Control ) . Surely my Lord is ( found by treading ) the straight road ( of truth and justice ) .
If even then you turn away then I have literally brought you ( all those Commandments ) with which I have been sent to you . And my Lord will appoint some other people in your place as your successors , and you can do Him no harm at all . Surely my Lord is Protector of everything .
And when Our Command ( of torment ) came to pass ( then ) We saved Hud and the believers with him because of Our Mercy , and We delivered them from severe punishment .
And these are ( the people of ) Ad who denied the Revelations of their Lord and disobeyed their Messengers and followed the dictates of every oppressive ( and arrogant ) enemy of the Truth .
A curse was set to chase them in this world , and ( will chase them ) on the Day of Resurrection ( as well ) . Bear in mind that ( the people of ) Ad denied their Lord . Beware ! Far away ( from Mercy ) are the Ad , the people of Hud !
And ( We sent ) to ( the people of ) Thamud their ( kinship ) brother Salih . He said : O my people , worship Allah . You have no God apart from Him . He is the One Who raised you up from the earth and settled you therein . So , beg His forgiveness and then turn to Him in repentance . Surely my Lord is Near , Granting prayers .
They said : O Salih , only you have been the centre of hopes among our people before this . Are you forbidding us to worship those ( idols ) which our forefathers used to worship ? We are really caught in a disquieting doubt about ( the Oneness of Allah ) towards which you are calling us .
Salih said : O my people , just think if I cling to the clear proof from my Lord , and I have been blessed with a ( special ) Mercy from Him ( then after that ) if I disobey Him ( by holding back His Commandments from you ) , then who can help me escape from ( the torment of ) Allah ? So , you can add to me nothing except inflicting loss .
And , O my people , this is a ( peculiarly created ) she - camel of Allah ( which ) is a Sign for you . So leave her free to graze in Allahs earth and do her no harm lest an imminent torment should seize you .
Then they ( hamstrung and ) slaughtered her . Salih said : ( Now ) you luxuriate in your abodes ( only ) for three days . This is a promise which will ( never ) become untrue .
Then , when Our Command ( of torment ) came to pass , We saved Salih and the believers with him through Our Mercy and ( also delivered them ) from the humiliation of that day . Surely your Lord alone is Powerful , Sovereign .
And a dreadful Blast overtook the wrongdoers . So morning found them ( dead ) lying prone in their homes .
As if they had never dwelled there . Remember ! ( The people of ) Thamud denied their Lord . Beware ! Far away ( from Mercy ) are ( the people of ) Thamud .
And indeed Our deputed angels came to Ibrahim ( Abraham ) bearing glad tidings . They greeted him , saying : Peace ( be on you ) , and Ibrahim ( Abraham ) reciprocated : Peace ( be on you ) . Then he did not take any time and brought ( them ) a roasted calf ( in hospitality ) .
Then , when ( Ibrahim [ Abraham ] ) saw that their hands did not stretch towards that ( dish ) , he took them as strangers and felt a little fear of them in ( his ) heart . They said : Do not be afraid . We have been sent to the people of Lut ( Lot ) .
And his wife ( Sara ) who was standing ( beside ) laughed . So We conveyed to his ( wife ) the glad tidings of the birth of Ishaq ( Isaac ) and beyond Ishaq of Yaqub ( Jacob ) .
She said : Amazing ! Shall I bear a child while I have grown old and my husband ( too ) is an old man ? It is extremely astonishing indeed !
The angels said : Are you wondering at Allahs Command ? O people of the house , ( showered ) upon you are Mercy and Blessings of Allah . Indeed He ( is ) Praiseworthy , Glorious .
So when fear disappeared from Ibrahim ( Abraham ) and the glad tidings reached him , he disputed ( with ) Our ( angels ) about the people of Lut ( Lot ) .
Assuredly Ibrahim ( Abraham ) was indeed most forbearing , sobbing and submissive and turning to Us under all circumstances .
( The angels said : ) O Ibrahim ( Abraham ) , leave off this ( matter ) . Surely the Command of ( torment from ) your Lord has now come to pass , and the torment is about to seize them which cannot be averted .
And when Our deputed angels visited Lut ( Lot ) , he felt worried on their arrival and on account of them his strength sank and he said : This is a day of great distress . ( The angels were extremely handsome , and Lut ( Lot ) was aware of the evil habit of his people . So he was perturbed at the fear of possible mischief . )
( So the same happened that he apprehended . ) The people of Lut ( Lot , hearing about the arrival of the guests , ) came to him running . And they were already addicted to evil - doing . Lut ( Lot ) said : O my ( disobedient ) people , here are my ( peoples ) daughters . They are pure and lawful for you ( through marriage ) . So , fear Allah and do not humiliate me before my guests ( because of your indecency ) . Is there not among you even a single man of upright character ?
They said : You know it well that we have nothing to do with your ( peoples ) daughters . And you certainly know what we desire .
Lut ( Lot ) said : Would that I had the power to resist you or I could seek shelter ( today ) in some indomitable fort .
( Thereupon the angels ) said : O Lut ( Lot ) , we are the messengers of your Lord . These people shall never be able to get at you . So leave in a part of the night with your family and let not any of you look ( back ) ; but ( do not take ) your wife ( with you ) . The same ( torment ) which will come upon them is going to reach her ( too ) . Surely , the time appointed for their ( torment ) is the morning . And is the morning not near ?
Then , when Our command ( of chastisement ) came to pass , We turned the town upside down and We rained upon it stones and pebbles of baked clay which incessantly teemed down ( layer upon layer ) .
Which were marked by your Lord . And this ( torment of stones ) is not far away from the wrongdoers ( even now ) .
And We ( sent ) to ( the people of ) Madyan their ( kinship ) brother Shuaib . He said : O my people , worship Allah . You have no God but He . And do not give short measure and weight . Indeed I see you prosperous , but I fear for you the torment of a day which is about to encompass ( you ) .
And , O my people , give full measure and full weight with justice , and do not give people their things less than their due . And do not spread destruction in the land by becoming mischief - mongers .
That which is left over from Allahs provision ( only that ) is better for you if you have faith . And I am not a guardian over you .
They said : O Shuaib , does your Prayer only command you that we forsake those ( gods ) which our fathers have been worshipping , or that we refrain from doing with our wealth what we like ? Surely you ( alone ) must be the most tolerant and guided one !
Shuaib said : O my people , tell me if I adhere to the clear proof from my Lord and He has also granted me pure and fine means of living from His Presence , ( then why should I not preach the Truth ) ? I ( also ) do not want that , following you , I myself start doing ( against the Truth ) the same that I am forbidding you . All I desire is to ( reform ) you as far as I can , and my capability comes only from Allahs ( help ) . So I have put my trust in Him alone and I turn towards Him alone .
And , O my people , let not your enmity and hostility against me so incite you ( due to which ) there comes upon you that ( torment ) that befell the people of Nuh ( Noah ) , or the people of Hud , or the people of Salih . And ( the days of ) the people of Lut ( Lot ) have not anyway passed far before you .
And seek forgiveness from your Lord , then turn to Him in repentance ( with true hearts ) . Indeed my Lord is Ever - Merciful , Most Loving .
They said : O Shuaib , we do not understand most of your talks , and we know you as a weak person in society . And were it not for your family , we would stone you . ( This is what we are conceding for , otherwise ) you enjoy no respect in our eyes .
Shuaib said : O my people , is my family more venerable to you than Allah ? And you have ( as if ) cast Him ( Allah ) behind your backs . Surely , my Lord has encompassed ( all ) your works .
And , O my people , keep working in your place ; I am doing my work . Soon will you come to know whom that torment seizes which will humiliate him , and who it is that is a liar . And wait on and I ( too ) wait along with you .
And when Our command ( of torment ) came We saved Shuaib and the believers with him through Our Mercy but a dreadful Blast seized the wrongdoers . So they reached the morning ( as dead ) lying prostrate in their homes
As if they had never put up there . Listen ! ( The people of ) Madyan are doomed as were doomed ( the people of ) Thamud .
And indeed We sent Musa ( Moses , too ) with Our Signs and a clear proof .
To Pharaoh and his chiefs . The chiefs of the people obeyed the command of Pharaoh , although Pharaohs command was not right .
On the Day of Resurrection he will lead his people and will ultimately bring them down into the Fire of Hell . And how evil that place is to be ushered into !
The curse has been made to chase them in this world and ( this will chase them ) on the Day of Resurrection ( as well ) . What an evil gift has been bestowed upon them !
( O Glorious Messenger ! ) That is some of the news We are relating to you of ( those ) towns some of which still exist and ( some ) were totally annihilated .
And We did not wrong them but they ( themselves ) wronged their souls . So , their false gods whom they worshipped besides Allah proved to them of no help when the command ( of torment ) of your Lord came forth . And those ( gods ) could add only to their destruction and devastation .
And that is how your Lord grips : He seizes the communities when they ( become ) tyrannous and corrupt . Surely His grip is agonizing and fierce .
Indeed these ( episodes ) contain lessons of warning for him who fears the chastisement of the Last Day . This ( Day of Rising ) is the Day when entire mankind will be gathered together and it is this Day when all will be made present .
And We are not deferring it but for an appointed term ( which has already been fixed ) .
When that Day comes , not a soul will be able to speak without His permission . Then some of them will be unfortunate and others fortunate .
So those who will be unfortunate will be ( put ) into Hell ; there they will be given to screaming and wailing .
They will abide in it till the heavens and the earth ( which will then exist ) last except as your Lord wills . Surely your Lord executes what He wills .
And those who will be fortunate will be in Paradise . They will abide in it forever till the heavens and the earth ( which will then exist ) endure except as your Lord wills . This is a bounty which will never be withdrawn .
So , ( O listener , ) do not have any doubt at all about those which they worship . They do not worship ( on the basis of any reason or insight ) , but ( they worship only ) as their ancestors have done contiguously before . And certainly We will pay them their full share ( of torment ) which will not be diminished in the least .
And indeed We gave Musa ( Moses ) the Book . Then differences arose concerning it . And had there not been a decree from your Lord gone forth before , the judgment between them would surely have been passed . And they are certainly caught in a disquieting doubt about it ( the Quran ) .
Your Lord will doubtlessly pay them in full for their works . He is certainly Well Aware of whatever they are doing .
So remain firm - footed as you have been commanded , and he too ( must persevere ) who has turned ( to Allah ) in your companionship . And , ( O people , ) do not revolt . Indeed He monitors whatever you do .
And incline not towards those who are engaged in oppression ( and exploitation ) lest the Fire ( of Hell ) should touch down at you and there will be no protector for you apart from Allah ; then help ( too ) will not be extended to you .
And establish Prayer at the two ends of the day and in some parts of the night . Surely good actions delete the evil ones . This is admonition for those who accept admonition .
And be steadfast . Surely Allah does not let the reward of the pious go to waste .
So why were there not among the communities that preceded you men of superior morality and wisdom who would stop people from mischief - mongering in the land , except a few of them whom We delivered ? And the unjust stuck to ( the same path of ) luxury and lustfulness that they were addicted to . And they were ( regular ) criminals .
And your Lord is not such that He would destroy the towns wrongfully while their dwellers are pious .
And had your Lord so willed , He would have made mankind one Umma ( Community . But He has not done so by force . On the contrary He has given free choice to all to adopt a religion . ) And ( now ) these people will always hold divergent views .
Except for him on whom your Lord has bestowed His Mercy and that is what He has created them for . And the Word of your Lord has been fulfilled : Surely I will fill Hell with all the ( disbelieving ) jinn and men .
And We are relating to you all the news of the Messengers whereby We strengthen your ( most purified ) heart . And in this ( chapter ) there has come to you the Truth and Advice and a lesson of warning ( and also a reminder ) for the believers .
And say to those who do not believe : Work on in your place and we are doing ( what our station demands ) .
And wait on ; we ( too ) are waiting .
And ( all ) the unseen of the heavens and the earth belongs to Allah alone and He is the One towards Whom every act is returned . So keep worshipping Him and keep trust in Him alone . And your Lord is not unmindful of the deeds that all of you do .
Alif Lam Ra ( Only Allah and the Messenger know the real meaning . ) These are the Verses of the illumining Book .
Verily , We have revealed it as Quran in the Arabic language so that you comprehend ( it directly ) .
( O Beloved ! ) We relate to you the best narrative by means of this Quran which We have revealed to you , though you were unaware ( of this story ) before this .
( It runs thus : ) When Yusuf ( Joseph ) said to his father : O my venerable father ! I have seen ( in a dream ) eleven stars and the sun and the moon . I have seen them prostrating themselves before me .
He said : O my son , do not relate your dream to your brothers , lest they should maneuver a plot against you . Surely , Satan is an open enemy to man .
In the same way your Lord will choose you ( for a divine station ) and will teach you how to infer conclusions ( i . e . the knowledge of the interpretation of dreams ) and will perfect His Favour upon you and the House of Yaqub ( Jacob ) as He perfected it upon your fathers ( grandfather and great grandfather ) Ibrahim ( Abraham ) and Ishaq ( Isaac ) . Indeed your Lord is All - Knowing , Most Wise .
Surely , there are ( many ) Signs ( in the parable of ) Yusuf ( Joseph ) and his brothers for those who are inquisitive .
( Call to mind the time ) when the brothers of Yusuf ( Joseph ) said : Certainly Yusuf ( Joseph ) and his brother are dearer to our father than we are whereas we are a stronger party ( comprising ten members ) . No doubt our father is lost into an evident ecstasy ( resulting from deep love for them ) .
( Now the only solution is : ) Kill Yusuf ( Joseph ) or banish him to some distant unknown place . ( Thus ) your fathers attention will be focused purely on you and after that become a band of righteous people ( by turning towards Allah in repentance ) .
A negotiator from among them said : Do not kill Yusuf ( Joseph ) and lower him down at the bottom of a dark deep well . Some traveller will pick him up and carry him away . ( So do this ) if ( at all ) you are up to ( something ) .
They said : O our father , what has happened to you that you do not trust us in the case of Yusuf ( Joseph ) while we are certainly his well - wishers ?
Send him with us tomorrow . He will eat lavishly and play and certainly we are his guards .
He said : This idea indeed makes me sad that you take him along and I am ( also ) afraid ( of this idea ) that some wolf may devour him while you are careless of his ( safeguard ) .
They said : If the wolf devours him while we , a strong party , too are ( present ) then we are as good as nothing .
Then , when they took him along and all agreed to throw him into some deep dark well , We revealed to him : ( O Yusuf [ Joseph ] , do not worry . A time will come when ) you will certainly remind them of this affair of theirs and they will not have the sense ( of your exalted station ) .
( Throwing Yusuf [ Joseph ] into the well ) they came to their father at night weeping ( deceptively ) .
They said : O our father , we went racing with one another and left Yusuf ( Joseph ) with our belongings . Then a wolf devoured him , but you will not believe us even though we are truthful .
They produced Yusufs ( Josephs ) shirt smearing it ( also ) with false blood . ( Yaqub [ Jacob ] ) said : ( This is not the truth . ) But your ( jealous , ill - commanding ) selves have made ( a colossal ) task easy and pleasant - looking for you ( which you eventually did accomplish ) . So better it is to be steadfast ( over this tragedy ) , and I seek only Allahs help against whatever you are narrating .
And ( there ) came a caravan of travellers . They sent their water - drawer . So he lowered his bucket ( into that well ) and he exclaimed : Good news ! Here is a boy ! And they hid him regarding him a valuable trade item . And Allah knows well the activities they were busy doing .
And Yusufs ( Josephs ) brothers ( who had returned to the site showed him as their deserter servant and ) sold him ( to the same caravan ) for a low price - a few Dirhams - because the travellers were ( already ) disinterested in ( buying ) him ( Yusuf . Later , the travellers took him to Egypt where they sold him . )
And the man in Egypt who purchased him ( was Qatfir by name , the finance minister of the King of Egypt Riyan ibn Walid , commonly known as Aziz [ of Egypt ] ) said to his wife ( Zulaikha ) : Make him stay honourably . He may bring us profit or we may adopt him as a son . Thus We established Yusuf ( Joseph ) and strengthened his position in the land [ of Egypt ] so that We might teach him how to infer from the events ( i . e . the interpretation of dreams ) . And Allah is the Master of His work but most people do not know .
And when he reached his full manhood , We endowed him with the judgment ( of Prophethood ) and the knowledge ( of the interpretation of dreams ) . This is how We bless the pious with reward .
And the woman ( Zulaikha ) , in whose house he was putting up , sought intensely to seduce him and she bolted the doors ( as well ) and said : Come ! Make haste ! ( I ask you . ) Yusuf ( Joseph ) said : I seek Allahs refuge . Surely , he ( your husband ) is my master . He has kept me most honourably . Indeed , the wrongdoers will not prosper .
( Yusuf [ Joseph ] refused ) but she ( Zulaikha ) had definitely made up her mind for him . And he too ( might ) have resolved had he not seen the Clear Sign of his Lord . It was ( made to happen ) like that ( in order that ) We keep away from him affliction and indecency both . Assuredly he was of Our chosen ( exalted ) servants .
And they both ran ( one behind the other ) towards the door and she ( Zulaikha ) tore his shirt from behind and both found her husband ( Aziz of Egypt ) at the door . She ( immediately ) said : What can be the punishment for him who intends to commit indecency with your wife except that he should be put in prison or ( he ) be given painful torment ?
Yusuf ( Joseph ) said : ( No indeed ! In truth ) it was she herself who sought to seduce me for her purpose . And ( in the meanwhile ) one of her household ( who was an infant ) bore witness : If his shirt is torn from the front , then she has spoken the truth and he is of the liars .
But if his shirt is torn from behind then she is a liar and he is of the truthful .
Then , when he ( Aziz of Egypt ) saw his shirt and found it torn from behind , he said : This is the craft of you women . Certainly your women - craft is highly ( dangerous ) .
O Yusuf ( Joseph ) ! Ignore it and , ( O Zulaikha , ) ask forgiveness for your sin . Surely it is you who are of the sinful .
And some women of ( the elite class in ) the city began to say : The wife of Aziz seeks to seduce her slave - boy for her purpose . The love for him ( the slave ) has gone deep into her heart . We surely see her in manifest error .
So when she ( Zulaikha ) heard their deceitful talk , she sent for them and arranged a meeting for them . ( She placed fruit before them ) and gave each one of them a knife and requested ( Yusuf ) : Walk out before them ( so that they may realize the cause of my state of mind ) . So , when they glanced at Yusuf ( Joseph and ) saw ( his dazzling beauty ) , they began to exalt ( the charm of his ecstatic beauty ) and ( in a dazed state ) cut their hands ( instead of fruits served to them ) . And ( having seen him ) exclaimed ( spontaneously ) : God save us ! This is not a human being ; he must be some exalted angel ( i . e . an embodiment of light descending from the transcendent realm of divinity ) !
( Zulaikhas trick worked . ) She spoke ( at this juncture ) : It is this ( embodiment of light ) you have been reproaching me for . It is , no doubt , I myself who sought to seduce him ( under violent urge ) but he remained firmly upright and did not yield . And if ( even now ) he does not do what I ask him for , he will surely be put into prison and will certainly be disgraced .
( By now the elite Egyptian women too had agreed to Zulaikhas viewpoint . Hearing them , ) Yusuf ( Joseph ) submitted : O my Lord ! The prison is far dearer to me than what these women are inviting me to . And if You do not turn away their craft from me , I shall get inclined towards their ( words ) and shall become of the unwise .
So , his Lord granted him the prayer and removed the women - craft from him . Surely He is the One Who is All - Hearing , All - Knowing .
Then even after seeing the signs of ( Yusufs [ Josephs ] decency and righteousness ) they deemed it appropriate to imprison him for a time ( so that the gossip of the episode among the people might die down ) .
And with him two young men also entered the prison . One of them said : I have seen myself ( in a dream ) pressing wine ( from grapes ) . And the other said : I have seen myself ( in a dream ) that I am carrying bread on my head , with birds picking at it . O Yusuf ( Joseph ) ! Tell us its interpretation . Surely , we see you one of the spirituality excellent .
Yusuf ( Joseph ) said : The food which is served to you ( daily ) will not have yet come to you when I shall inform both of you about its interpretation before its coming to you . This ( interpretation ) is of those branches of knowledge that my Lord has taught me . Verily , I have rejected ( from the very beginning ) the religion of the people who do not believe in Allah and they deny the Hereafter as well .
And I follow Din [ Religion ] of my father and forefathers : Ibrahim ( Abraham ) , Ishaq ( Isaac ) , and Yaqub ( Jacob ) . And we have no right to associate anything as a partner with Allah . This ( belief in the Oneness of Allah ) is a ( special ) bounty of Allah upon us and the people , but most people do not give thanks .
O my two companions of the prison ! ( Say : ) Are many separate gods better or One Allah , Who Dominates and Controls all ?
( In fact ) you worship none besides Allah except a few names which you and your forefathers have forged ( on your own ) . Allah has not sent down any authority for them . Judgment rests with Allah alone . He alone has commanded that worship none but Him . This is the straight path ( true Din [ Religion ] ) but most people do not know .
O my two companions of the prison ! ( The interpretation of the dream of ) one of you ( is that he ) will serve wine to his master ( the king ) , and as for the other , ( who has seen bread on his head , ) he will be crucified and then birds will pick at his head . The ( final ) judgment has been given about which you have asked .
And Yusuf ( Joseph ) said to the one whom he believed to be released : Mention me to your king ; ( he may thus recall that another innocent one is also lying in imprisonment ) . But Satan made him forget to mention ( him ) to his king and consequently Yusuf ( Joseph ) remained in prison for several years .
And ( one day ) the King said : I have seen ( in a dream ) seven fat cows whom seven lean cows are devouring and ( have seen ) seven green ears of corn and ( seven ) other dry . O courtiers ! Explain to me the implication of my dream if you know the interpretation of dreams .
They said : These are confused dreams and we do not know the interpretation of confused dreams .
And one of the two prisoners , who had been released and ( now ) after a long time remembered ( his promise to Yusuf [ Joseph ] ) , said : I shall tell you its interpretation ; so send me ( to Yusuf [ Joseph ] ) .
( Reaching the prison , he said : ) O Yusuf ( Joseph ) , the embodiment of truth , explain to us the interpretation ( of this dream ) that there are seven fat cows whom seven lean ones are devouring and there are seven green ears of corn and seven others which are dry , so that I may return to the people ( taking the interpretation ) and they may realize ( your value and dignity ) .
Yusuf ( Joseph ) said : You will cultivate as usual consecutively for seven years . So whatever you reap , keep it ( in store ) leaving the grains in their ears except a small quantity ( to thresh ) for your ( yearly ) consumption .
Then after this there will come seven hard years ( of drought ) which will consume that ( store ) which you will have laid up for these years except a small quantity ( which will fall surplus and ) which you will keep in reserve .
Then , following this will come a year during which people will be blessed with ( plenty of ) rain and ( the yield of fruits will be such as ) they will press juices ( of fruits that year ) .
And ( hearing this interpretation ) the king said : Bring Yusuf ( Joseph ) to me ( immediately ) . So when the messenger reached Yusuf ( Joseph ) , he said to him : Go back to your king and ask him : What is the state of those women ( now ) who cut their hands ? Surely my Lord knows their craft well .
The King ( called all the women including Zulaikha and ) asked : What happened to you when you ( all ) attempted to seduce Yusuf ( Joseph ) to turn him away from righteousness ? ( Explain what that affair was . ) They all ( unanimously ) uttered : Allah save us ! We have not noticed any evil in Yusuf ( Joseph ) . The wife of Aziz ( of Egypt , Zulaikha , too ) spoke : The truth has now become evident . ( The fact is that ) it was I who sought to seduce him for my purpose and it is surely he who is truthful .
( Yusuf [ Joseph ] ) said : I have done this ) so that he ( Aziz of Egypt , who has been my master and benefactor , ) may know that I have not betrayed his trust in his absence ( behind him ) , and surely Allah lets not the plots of those who betray trusts prove successful .
And I do not ( claim ) absolution of my self . Certainly self commands much evil except the one on whom my Lord bestows Mercy . Surely , my Lord is All - Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
And the King said : Bring him to me so that I may appoint him specifically ( as an adviser ) to me . So , when the King had ( one - to - one ) dialogue with him ( he felt highly impressed and ) said : ( O Yusuf [ Joseph ] , ) surely from today onward you are a man of authority and trust with us ( i . e . you are inducted into the governance of the state ) .
Yusuf ( Joseph ) said : ( If you really want me to accomplish some special assignment , then ) appoint me as ( a minister and trustee of ) the treasures in the land ( of Egypt ) . Indeed I am well versed in resource management and resource protection and an expert ( in financial management ) .
This is how We bestowed upon Yusuf ( Joseph ) the rule over the land ( of Egypt so that ) he could live therein wherever he desired . We honour with Our Mercy whom We will and waste not the reward of the pious .
And certainly the reward of the Hereafter is of greater value for those who believe and tread the path of Godwariness .
( During the days of famine ) Yusufs ( Josephs ) brothers came ( to Egypt to procure grain ) and came to him . So Yusuf ( Joseph ) recognized them , but they could not recognize him .
And when Yusuf ( Joseph ) had furnished them with their provisions ( supplies and material ) , he said : Bring me your brother on the fathers side ( Benjamin ) . Do you not see ( how ) full I measure and I am the best host ( too ) ?
So if you do not bring him to me , then ( in future ) there will not be any measure ( of grain ) with me for you , nor will you be able to approach me .
They said : We will solicit his father in connection with sending him and we will certainly do ( it ) .
And Yusuf ( Joseph ) said to his servants : Put their money ( which they paid for grain back ) into their sacks so that when they return to their family they may identify it ( that the money is back ) . It is likely that they may come again ( for the very same reason ) .
So when they returned to their father they said : O our father , ( further provision of ) grain for us has been banned ( except that Benjamin accompanies us . ) So send our brother ( Benjamin ) with us ( in order that ) we may fetch ( more ) grain , and we shall certainly be his guards .
Yaqub ( Jacob ) said : Shall I trust you with him ( as well ) the same way as before this I trusted you with his brother ( Yusuf - Joseph ) ? Then Allah alone is the Best Protector , and He alone is the Most Merciful of all the merciful .
When they opened their packs , ( therein ) they found their money ( which ) had been returned to them . They said : O our respectable father , what else do we want ? Here is our money ( too ) that has been returned to us , and we shall ( now be obliged to ) fetch grain for our family . And we shall take good care of our brother , and will bring the load of a camel in addition . This grain ( that we have already brought ) is a small quantity .
Yaqub ( Jacob ) said : I shall not send him with you at all until you give me a firm promise by swearing a solemn oath by Allah that you shall certainly bring him ( back ) to me unless you ( all ) are beset ( somewhere or slain ) . Then , when they gave Yaqub the firm promise he said : Allah is the Guardian to watch over what we are saying .
And he said : O my sons , do not enter ( the city ) all of you by one gate but enter ( dispersed ) through different gates . And I cannot save you by any means from Allahs ( Decree ) because Judgment ( Destiny ) rests will Allah alone . In Him have I put my trust , and all those who trust must trust in Him alone .
And when they entered Egypt in compliance with what their father had commanded , that command could not save them from Allahs ( Decree ) but it was Yaqubs ( Jacobs ) heartfelt desire which he fulfilled and ( also take not this desire or strategy as meaningless for you know it not ) . Surely Yaqub ( Jacob ) possessed knowledge as We had blessed with ( special ) knowledge but most people do not know ( these realities ) .
And when they came to Yusuf ( Joseph ) , he offered his brother ( Benjamin ) a seat close to him ( and ) said ( to him quietly ) : Verily I am your brother ( Yusuf [ Joseph ] ) so feel not aggrieved at what they have been doing .
So when ( Yusuf [ Joseph ] ) had provided them with their material , he placed ( the Kings ) goblet into his brothers ( Benjamins ) sack . Later a herald called out : O you men of caravan , ( halt ; ) surely you ( seem to be ) thieves .
They turned towards them and said : What have you found missing ?
They ( the servants of the Kings court ) said : We are missing the royal goblet and the man who brings it ( after searching ) will get a camels load of grain as reward and I pledge myself for it .
They said : By Allah , indeed you know well we have not come ( here to commit some crime ) and create mischief in the land , nor are we thieves .
They ( the servants ) said : ( Decide for yourselves ) what should be the punishment ( of the thief ) if you turn out to be liars .
They said : Its penalty will be that the one from whose sack ( the goblet ) is found , he himself will be its penalty ( i . e . he should be held in retribution ) . That is how We punish the wrongdoers .
So Yusuf ( Joseph ) began to search their sacks before his brothers . Then ( at last ) he took ( the goblet ) out of his ( real ) brothers ( Benjamins ) sack . That is how We revealed to Yusuf ( Joseph ) the plan . He could not have held his brother ( as a captive ) under the law of the King ( of Egypt ) except ( as ) Allah wills . We exalt in ranks whom We like . And above every possessor of knowledge is ( also ) One possessing greater knowledge .
They said : If he has committed theft ( then nothing to wonder at ) . Indeed his brother ( Yusuf [ Joseph ] ) has also committed theft before . So Yusuf ( Joseph ) kept it ( hidden ) in his heart and did not reveal it to them and said ( only to himself ) : Yours is the worst case and Allah knows well whatever you are saying .
They said : O Aziz ( of Egypt ) , his father is an aged elderly person . So detain anyone of us in his stead . Surely we have seen you among the generous ( benevolent ) people .
Yusuf ( Joseph ) said : Allah save us from detaining someone ( other ) than him with whom we have found our item ! Then We shall become of the unjust .
So , when they lost hope about Yusuf ( Joseph ) , they counselled ( among themselves ) in isolation . The eldest ( brother ) among them said : Do you not know that your father took a firm covenant from you in the Name of Allah , and before that ( you also know ) you committed excesses in respect of Yusuf ( Joseph ) ? So I shall not leave this land at all until my father accords me permission or Allah gives some judgment in my case and He is the Best of those who judge .
Go you back to your father and say : O our father , your son has surely committed theft ( and consequently he has been held ) . And we bore witness only to what we knew . And we were no guardians of the unseen .
And ( if you do not believe us , then ) you may enquire of ( the people of ) the town where we have been , and ( find out ) from the caravan we have travelled with , and we are certainly truthful ( in what we are saying ) .
Yaqub ( Jacob ) said : ( It is not so . ) In fact your ( ill - commanding ) selves have made this affair attractive for you . Now ( only ) patienceis the finest ( option ) . It is likely that Allah brings to me all of them . He is indeed All - Knowing , Most Wise .
Yaqub ( Jacob ) then turned his face away from them and said : Alas ! ( My dear son ) Yusuf ( Josephs unbearable separation ) ! And his eyes had gone white with grief . And he was suppressing his sorrow .
They said : By Allah , you will continue remembering Yusuf ( [ Joseph ] alone ) till you get near death or pass away .
He said : I bewail my worry and grief to Allah alone , and I know from Allah what you do not know .
O my sons , go and fetch me some news about Yusuf ( Joseph ) and his brother ( from somewhere ) and despair not of Allahs Mercy , for indeed only those despair of Allahs Mercy who reject faith .
So when they came back to Yusuf ( [ Joseph ] again ) , they submitted : O Aziz ( of Egypt ) , distress has fallen upon us and our family ( and we are suffering from dreadful famine ) . And we have brought only ( this ) meager amount . So give us full measure ( of grain against it ) and ( in addition ) extend to us ( some ) charity ( as well ) . Indeed Allah rewards those who give away charity plentiously .
Yusuf ( Joseph ) said : Do you remember what you did to Yusuf ( Joseph ) and his brother ? Were you ( then ) ignorant ?
They said : Are you really Yusuf ( Joseph ) ? He said : ( Yes , ) I am Yusuf ( Joseph ) and here is my brother . Indeed Allah has been gracious to us . Surely the one who fears Allah and remains steadfast , then surely Allah does not waste the reward of the pious .
They exclaimed : By Allah , Allah has certainly exalted you above us , and certainly we alone were the sinners .
Yusuf ( Joseph ) said : No blame ( or penalty ) lies on you today . May Allah grant you His forgiveness and He is the Most Merciful of all the merciful .
Take this shirt of mine and cast it over my fathers face ; he will recover his sight . ( Then ) bring me the whole of your family .
When the caravan left ( Egypt ) , his father ( Yaqub [ Jacob ] ) said ( while sitting in Canaan ) : If you do not consider me unstable due to senility , I am smelling the fragrance of Yusuf ( Joseph ) .
They said : By Allah , you are certainly in the ( same ) ecstasy of your ( old ) love .
But when the bearer of the glad tidings arrived , and he cast that shirt over Yaqub ( Jacobs ) face , his sight returned the same moment . Yaqub ( Jacob ) said : Did I not say to you that I know from Allah what you do not know ?
They said : O our father , seek for us forgiveness ( from Allah ) for our sins . Indeed we alone are the sinners .
Yaqub ( Jacob ) said : Soon shall I pray to my Lord for forgiveness for you . Indeed He alone is Most Forgiving Ever - Merciful .
Then , when they ( i . e . all the members of the family ) came to Yusuf ( Joseph , he presented them a reception outside the city in the form of a royal procession comprising extensive transport arrangements , soldiers and general public , and ) he venerated his parents and made them sit beside him , ( or embraced them , ) and ( offering them welcome ) said : Enter Egypt and if Allah so wills ( then stay here ) with peace and comfort .
And he seated his parents on the throne and they ( all ) fell down prostrate before Yusuf ( Joseph ) and Yusuf ( Joseph ) said : O father , this is the interpretation of ( that ) dream of mine which I had seen ( long ) before . ( To most of the commentators it took forty years . ) And my Lord has surely proved it true . And indeed He did me a ( great ) favour when He took me out of the prison and brought all of you ( here ) from the desert after Satan had stirred up discord between me and my brothers . The fact is that my Lord makes easy with ( His ) plan whatever He wills . Indeed He alone is All - Knowing , Most Wise .
O my Lord ! Verily You granted me dominion and blessed me with the knowledge of the interpretation of dreams . O Creator of the heavens and the earth , You are my Helper in this world and in the Hereafter ( as well ) . Make me die in a state of total submission to ( Din [ Religion ] of ) Islam and make me join the company of those who are upright .
O My Esteemed Beloved ! This ( narrative ) is of the news of the unseen which We are revealing to you and you were not present with them when they ( Yusuf [ Josephs ] brothers ) were co - working to conclude their conspiracy and were plotting to deceive .
And most people will not believe even if you ( so ardently ) desire .
And you do not ask for any reward from them for this ( communicating and preaching the Message ) . This Quran is but a reminder to all mankind .
And how many a Sign is there in the heavens and the earth which these people pass by but they are heedless of them !
And most of them do not believe in Allah , but that they are polytheists .
Have they gone free from this fear that a prevailing calamity of Allahs torment will come upon them , or the Last Hour will seize them all of a sudden while they have no news of it ?
( O Glorious Beloved ! ) Say : This is my way . I invite towards Allah . I am ( firm and committed to ) my vision and insight , I and also he who complies with me . And Holy is Allah , and I am not of the polytheists .
And before you also We sent men alone from among the inhabitants of ( various ) towns to whom We sent Revelations . Have they not travelled in the land so that they might ( themselves ) witness what was the end of those before them ? And surely the Home in the Hereafter has far greater value for the Godfearing . Do you not have reason ?
Until when the Messengers despaired ( of their disobedient people , ) and those denying communities developed this scepticism that they were told a lie ( i . e . they will not be tormented ) , Our help reached the Messengers . Then We delivered whom We willed . And Our torment is not averted from the people committed to do evil .
Truly in their stories there is a lesson of warning for men of understanding . This ( Quran ) is not a Revelation that can be forged but a confirmation of those ( revealed Books ) which were revealed before it , an explanation of everything and guidance and mercy for those who believe .
Alif , Lam , Mim , Ra . ( Only Allah and the Messenger know the real meaning . ) These are the Verses of the Book of Allah , and whatever has been revealed to you from your Lord is the Truth , but most people do not believe .
And Allah is He Who has raised aloft the heavens ( in space ) without pillars ( as ) you see ; then He settled Himself on the Throne of His Authority ( encompassing the entire universe befitting His glory ) and fettered the sun and the moon to a system , each moving ( in its respective orbit to complete its rotation ) during its appointed term . He alone devises strategies for the total system ( of the entire universe ) and vividly manifests ( all the ) Signs ( or the laws of nature ) so that you may develop firm faith in appearing face to face before your Lord .
And He is the One Who spread out the earth ( despite its being round ) and brought about mountains and rivers in it and produced pairs of ( genders ) two each among all kinds of fruits ( as well . He is the One Who ) stretches the cover of the night over the day . Indeed there are ( many ) Signs in it for those who meditate .
And there are in the earth tracts ( of different kinds ) that are adjacent to each other and the gardens of grapes and crops and palm trees , clustered and non - clustered . All these are irrigated with the same water . And ( despite that ) We make some of them superior to others in taste . Verily there are ( great ) Signs in it for the people who apply reason .
And if you are surprised ( at the denial of the disbelievers ) , then ( more ) surprising is this that they say : What , when we become dust ( after death ) , shall we then be created anew ? They are the ones who deny their Lord , and they alone will have shackles round their necks . And they are the ones who are the inmates of Hell . They will reside in it forever .
And they hasten to demand from you punishment before mercy though many torments have passed before them . And , ( O Beloved , ) your Lord is Most Forgiving to the people despite their ( oppression and ) injustice . But certainly your Lord is Severe in punishment ( as well ) .
And the disbelievers say : Why has any Sign not been sent down to this ( Messenger ) from his Lord ? ( O My Glorious Messenger ! ) You are only a warner ( to the disobedient of their evil consequences ) and a provider of guidance to every community ( of the world ) .
Allah knows what every female bears in her womb , and how much the wombs contract and how much they distend , and with Him is everything in a fixed measure .
He is the Knower of the unseen and the seen , the Most Great ( and ) the Most Exalted .
He among you who talks in a low voice and the other who talks in a loud voice , and he who is hidden in ( the darkness of ) the night and he who moves about in the day ( light ) , all are alike ( to Him ) .
For ( every ) human being there are ( angels ) coming in succession who , before him and behind him , guard him by the Command of Allah . Verily , Allah does not change the state of a people until they bring about a change in themselves . And when Allah intends to torment a people ( due to their own evil works ) , then none can avert it . Nor is there any helper for them apart from Allah .
He is the One Who , to rouse in you ( sometime ) fear and ( some other time ) hope , shows you lightning and ( at times ) raises ( rain - laden ) heavy clouds .
The thunder ( of clouds and lightning or the angel appointed over it ) and all angels glorify Him with His Praise out of His fear . And He sends thunderbolts and strikes with them whom He wills . And they ( the disbelievers , despite these Signs of His Might , ) dispute about Allah . And He is Stern in strategy and Severe in grip .
Calling towards the Truth ( i . e . the Oneness of Allah ) is for Him alone . And those ( false gods - idols ) they ( i . e . disbelievers ) worship besides Him cannot give them any answer at all . Their example is like the one who ( sits ) stretching both his palms towards water so that it may reach his mouth ( itself ) , but it ( i . e . water ) reaches not ( like this ) . And ( in like manner ) the praying of disbelievers ( to idols and their idol - worship ) is but wandering distracted .
And whoever is in the heavens and the earth prostrates himself before Allah , ( some ) willingly and ( others ) perforce , and their shadows ( too prostrate themselves before Him ) morning and evening . ( Then why do the disbelievers do idol - worship turning away from Allah ? )
Say ( before these disbelievers ) : Who is the Sustainer of the heavens and the earth ? Say ( yourself ) : Allah . ( Again ) ask ( them ) : Have you taken besides Allah ( these idols ) as your protectors who cannot control any profit or loss even for themselves ? Say : Can the blind and the seeing be equal ? Or can darkness and light be the same ? Have they associated such partners with Allah that have also created ( some creation ) themselves similar to that of Allah , so this creation ( created by these idols ) has caused them doubt of resemblance ( i . e . error of judgment that they too could create as Allah does ) ? Say : Allah alone is the Creator of everything . And He is One . He is Dominant over all .
He sends down water from the sky and the valleys flow according to their ( respective ) capacity . Then the floodwater carries the scum raised to the surface . And the items that are heated in the fire for making ornaments or other articles also have foam that comes up the same way . Thus Allah illustrates examples of the Truth and falsehood . So , ( whether produced by water or by fire ) the foam or scum passes away useless but what is beneficial to the people endures in the earth . That is how Allah illustrates examples .
For those who accept the Command of their Lord is the excellent outcome . And those who reject His Command , even though they possess all that is in the earth and the like of it added to that , and they atone it ( to be delivered from torment , even then ) they are the ones whose accountability will be horrible . And Hell is their abode , and that is a wretched abode .
Someone who knows that whatever has been revealed to you is the Truth , can he be like the one who is blind ? Truly it is only those endowed with wisdom who accept admonition .
Who fulfil their pledge to Allah and do not breach their covenant .
And who keep unified all ( fulfil all their obligations to Allah , their obligations to the Messenger [ blessings and peace be upon him ] , to humanity at large and to their close relatives ) that Allah has enjoined to be unified and remain in a state of fear from Allah and dread an evil reckoning .
And who remain steadfast in seeking the pleasure of their Lord , and establish Prayer and spend ( both ) secretly and openly out of the sustenance We have provided and continue eliminating evil by means of good ; they are the ones for whom there is a ( beautiful ) home in the Hereafter .
( There ) are evergreen gardens . They will enter them with the pious from among their ancestors , their wives and their children . And the angels will come to them through every door ( of Paradise ) .
( Greeting and felicitating them , they will say : ) Peace be upon you as a reward for your patience . So ( see now ) what a beautiful home it is of the Hereafter !
And those who break the promise of Allah after making it firm and strand all ( the relations and obligations ) that Allah has commanded to be kept unified , and do mischief and strife in the land upon them is the curse and for them is evil home .
Allah releases the provision abundantly for whom He pleases and restrains ( for whom He wills ) . And these ( disbelievers ) are greatly charmed by the worldly life whereas , in contrast with the life in the Hereafter , the worldly life is nothing but a worthless provision .
And the disbelievers say : Why has any Sign not been sent down to him ( the Messenger ) from his Lord ? Say : Verily Allah , ( despite Signs , ) holds astray whom He wills and leads him towards Himself who turns to Him in repentance .
Those who believe and their hearts become calm and contented with the remembrance of Allah know that it is the remembrance of Allah alone that brings calm to the hearts .
Those who believe and do pious works , for them there are pleasures and rejoicing and excellent abode ( in the Hereafter ) .
( O Beloved ! ) Thus We have sent you ( as Messenger ) to an Umma ( Community ) before whom in fact ( all ) the communities have passed . ( This is now the last of all the communities ) so that you may recite to them that ( Book ) which We have revealed to you . And they are still denying ar - Rahman ( the Most Kind Lord ) . Say : He is my Lord . There is no God but He . In Him have I put my trust and I turn towards Him alone .
And if there were a Quran by which mountains could be set in motion , or by which the earth could be split open or by which the dead could be spoken to , ( even then they would not believe in it ) . But all matters are under the Control of Allah . Have the believers not yet perceived that if Allah had so willed , He would have guided all mankind ? And ( some ) disaster will continue afflicting the disbelievers due to their misdeeds or will be alighting close to their homes ( i . e . towns ) until Allahs promise ( of torment ) comes to pass . Surely Allah does not go against His promise .
Indeed the Messengers were mocked ( by the disbelievers ) before you ( as well ) . So I granted the disbelievers respite and then seized them ( with torment ) . ( See ) then how My torment was !
He ( Allah ) Who is watching the conduct of every soul and ( these idols that the disbelievers ) have made peers to Allah ( can they be alike ? No way ! ) Say : ( Just ) name them . ( You fools ! ) Do you inform Him ( Allah ) of something whose ( existence ) He does not know in the whole earth ? Or is it all ( mere ) superficial talk ( which has no contact with reality ) ? Rather ( the truth is that ) the deceptive scheme of the disbelievers has been made fascinating to them and they have been hindered from the ( straight ) path . And he whom Allah holds strayed , there is none who can be his guide .
There is for them chastisement in the worldly life ( as well ) , but certainly the torment in the Hereafter is more fierce . And there is none who can rescue them from ( the punishment of ) Allah .
A glimpse of the Paradise that has been promised to the Godfearing ( depicts that ) it has rivers flowing under it . Its fruits are everlasting , and so ( also ) is its shade . This is ( the beauty of ) the end of those who adopt Godwariness . And the end of the disbelievers is the Fire of Hell .
And those whom We have given the Book ( the Torah , if they are true believers , then ) they rejoice at this ( Quran ) which has been revealed to you . And also some from among their sects are those who deny a part of it . Say : I have been given only this command that I worship Allah and must not associate ( any ) partner with Him . I invite towards Him alone , and to Him have I to return .
And in like manner We have revealed this ( Quran ) as a Commandment in the Arabic language . And , ( O listener , ) if you follow the desires of these ( disbelievers ) after the ( conclusive ) knowledge has reached you , then there is no helper or protector for you against Allah .
And , ( O Messenger , ) indeed We sent before you ( many ) Messengers and brought up for them wives and children ( as well ) . And that is not the role of a Messenger to bring a Sign but by Allahs Command . There is an inscription for every appointed term .
Allah erases whatever ( writing ) He wills and confirms ( whatever He wills ) . And with Him alone is the Real Book ( the Protected Tablet [ al - Lawh al - Mahfuz ] ) .
And whether We show you ( during your visible life ) a portion ( of the torment ) that We have promised these ( disbelievers ) , or We lift you ( before that - both these options are subject to Our Will ) . Your assignment is only to communicate ( the Commandments ) and accountability rests with Us .
Do they not see that We are persistently reducing the land ( under their control - most of the areas under their rule are gradually accepting the Islamic Rule ) ? And Allah is the One Who decrees ; there is none who can undo His decree . And He is Swift in accountability .
And no doubt they also indulged in deceitful plots who have passed before them . So the power to reverse all these plots ( also ) rests with Allah . He knows best what every soul is busy earning , and the disbelievers will soon come to know for whom is the Home of the Hereafter !
And the disbelievers say : You are not a Messenger . Say : Sufficient is Allah as a Witness between you and me ( on my Messengership ) , and so also is the one who ( exactly ) possesses the knowledge of the ( revealed ) Book .
Alif , Lam , Ra . ( Only Allah and the Messenger know the real meanings . ) It is a ( glorious ) Book which We have revealed to you so that you may bring mankind out of the darkness ( of disbelief ) to the light ( of faith . And moreover ) by the Command of their Lord ( lead them ) to the path of the Almighty , the Praiseworthy
Allah , to Whom belongs ( all ) that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth . And there is destruction for the disbelievers on account of severe punishment .
They are the people who love the life of this world more than the Hereafter , and hinder ( the people ) from the path of Allah , and look for crookedness in it ( the True Din [ Religion ] ) . They ( have fallen ) deep into error .
And We have not sent any Messenger but with the language of his people so that he may make ( the message of the Truth ) more and more clear to them . Then Allah leads astray whom He wills and provides with guidance whom He wills . And He is Almighty , Most Wise .
And indeed We sent Musa ( Moses ) with Our Signs : ( O Musa [ Moses ] ) , bring your people out of darkness to the light and remind them of the Days of Allah ( which had come upon them and their preceding generations ) . Surely there are Signs in it for those who are highly steadfast ( and ) deeply grateful .
And ( call to mind the time ) when Musa ( Moses ) said to his people : Recall ( that ) blessing of Allah conferred upon you when He delivered you from the people of Pharaoh who used to afflict you with severe torment , slaying your male children and sparing the female ones . And in it was a great trial for you from your Lord .
And ( recall ) when your Lord proclaimed : If you thank , I shall certainly increase ( My blessings on ) you , and if you are ungrateful , then My torment is surely severe .
And Musa ( Moses ) said : If you and all others on earth disbelieve , then Allah is indeed Self - Sufficient , Most Praisworthy .
Has the account not reached you of those who have passed away before you ? They were the people of Nuh ( Noah ) and ( of the communities ) of Ad and Thamud and ( others ) who came after them . No one knows them except Allah ( because they have been totally annihilated from the surface of the earth ) . Their Messengers came to them with Clear Signs . So they put their hands into their mouths ( out of mockery and spite ) and ( dared ) say : We deny this ( Din [ Religion ] ) which you have been sent with , and we are certainly in awe - inspiring doubt about what you invite us to .
Their Messengers said : Do you have doubt about Allah Who is the Creator of the heavens and the earth , ( Who ) calls you so that He forgives your sins for you and ( despite your disobedience ) gives you respite for a fixed term ? They ( the disbelievers ) said : You are but human beings like us . You seek to hold us back from these ( idols ) our fathers used to worship . So bring us some clear proof .
Their Messengers said to them : Though ( in constitution of self ) we are humans like you , but ( also mark the difference that ) Allah favours whom He likes of His servants . ( Then how are you equal ? ) And ( as for clear proof ) it is not for us to bring you a proof without Allahs decree , and the believers must put their trust in Allah alone .
And what is the matter with us that we should not put our trust in Allah while He alone has shown us the paths ( of guidance and success ) ? And we will certainly bear your persecutions with patience , and those who trust should put their trust in Allah alone .
And the disbelievers said to their Messengers : We will banish you by all means from our country , or you will have to return to our faith . Their Lord then revealed to them : We shall certainly destroy the unjust people .
And We shall certainly settle you in the ( same ) land after them . This ( covenant ) is for every such person that fears standing before My Presence and dreads My promise ( of torment ) .
And ( ultimately ) the Messengers sought victory ( from Allah ) , and every obstinate rebel met defeat and came to nothing .
Beyond this ( devastation ) is Hell ( again ) . And he will be served with fetid water of oozing pus .
Which he will take sip by sip with great difficulty , and will not be able to gulp it down the throat . And death will assail him from all sides , and he will not be able ( even ) to die . And that ( again ) will be followed by ( one more ) extremely grievous torment .
The example of those who have rejected faith in their Lord is that their works are like ashes on which blows the strong wind on a stormy day they are unable to grasp anything of the ( works ) that they earned . This is straying far into error .
( O listener ! ) Have you not seen that Allah has created the heavens and the earth in accordance with ( a strategy based on ) the Truth . He can annihilate you if He so wills and bring new creation ( in your place ) .
And this is not ( in the least ) difficult for Allah ( to execute ) .
And ( on the Day of Grand Assembly ) all ( the higher and the lower ranks ) will appear before Allah . The weak ones ( the followers ) will ask the ( powerful ) arrogant ones : We obeyed you ( the whole life ) . So can you now manage for us some degree of rescue from Allahs torment ? Those ( affluent ones ) will reply ( to their poor followers ) : Had Allah guided us , we would also have shown you the path of guidance ( i . e . we were ourselves misguided so we misguided you too ) . It is all the same ( today ) whether we sigh and wail or forbear . We have no way to escape .
And when the decision will have been given , Satan will say : Indeed Allah gave you a true promise , and I ( also ) promised you something ; so I have violated the promise . And I had no authority over you ( in the world ) except that I called you ( towards falsehood ) . So you accepted my call ( for your own interest ) . Now do not blame me but blame your ( own ) selves . I can do nothing ( today ) to help you out , nor can you extend any help to me . Before this you have been associating me as a partner ( with Allah ) . Surely I deny that ( today ) . Undoubtedly there is a painful punishment for the wrongdoers .
And those who believe and stick to pious deeds will be admitted to the Gardens with streams flowing under them . They will live there forever by the Command of Allah . Their greeting word there ( at the time of meeting ) will be : Peace .
Have you not seen how Allah sets forth the example : a good word is like a good tree ? Its root is firm ( in the earth ) and its branches reach into the sky .
( That tree ) yields fruit at all times by the Command of its Lord , and Allah illustrates examples for the people so that they may take advice .
And the example of an evil word is like that of an evil tree which is uprooted from the surface of the earth ( and ) which has no chance to get firm ( in the soil and survive ) .
Allah keeps the believers firm - footed in the life of this world as well as in the Hereafter with ( the blessing ) of this Firm Word , but Allah holds the wrongdoers astray . And Allah puts into action whatever He wills .
Have you not seen those who have exchanged Allahs Favour ( of belief ) for disbelief and have lowered their people into the house of destruction ?
( That ) is Hell in which they will be thrown headlong , and that is an evil abode .
And they set up partners with Allah so that they may turn ( the people ) away from His path . Say : Benefit ( a few days ) gain ; surely you will end up in the Fire .
Say to My servants who have believed that they must establish Prayer and spend ( in Our Way ) both secretly and openly of the provision that We have granted them before the dawn of the Day when neither any transaction will take place nor any ( worldly ) friendship ( will profit ) .
Allah is He Who created the heavens and the earth and poured down water from the sky and then by means of this water produced fruits for you as provision . And He has made vessels subservient to you so that they may sail in the sea by Allahs Command and He has ( also ) put rivers under your control .
And for your benefit He has subjected the sun and the moon ( to a regular system ) ; they keep rotating ( in their respective orbits ) . And He has also subdued the night and the day ( to a system ) for your ( system of life ) .
And He has given you everything that you asked Him for and if you seek to number the Favours of Allah , you will not be able to count them all . Indeed Man is highly unjust and extremely ungrateful .
And ( recall the time ) when Ibrahim ( Abraham ) submitted : O my Lord , make this city ( Makka ) a land of peace and keep me and my children from idol - worship .
O my Lord ! These ( idols ) have led many people astray . So whoever follows me will belong to me , and whoever disobeys me then indeed You are Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
O our Lord ! Verily , I have settled my offspring ( Ismail [ Ishmael ] ) in the barren valley ( of Makka ) in the close vicinity of Your Sacred House , O our Lord , so that they may establish Prayer . So make the hearts of the people incline towards them with love and fondness , and provide for them ( all kinds of ) fruits as sustenance so that they may remain grateful .
O our Lord ! Surely You know ( all ) what we hide and what we show , and there is nothing which is hidden from Allah either on earth or in the heaven .
All praise belongs to Allah alone Who has bestowed upon me ( two sons ) in old age , Ismail ( Ishmael ) and Ishaq ( Isaac ) . Indeed my Lord is the All - Hearer of prayer .
O my Lord ! Make me and my children the ones who establish Prayer ; O my Lord , and grant my prayer .
O my Lord ! Forgive me and ( forgive ) my parents and all the believers as well on the Day when reckoning ( and accountability ) will be held .
And never think of Allah to be unaware of the works the wrongdoers are doing . He is only giving them ( the wrongdoers ) respite till the Day on which the eyes will be stare - fixed ( in horror ) .
Their heads lifted up , they will be running ( towards the Field of Reckoning - Assembly ) , with eyes unable to twinkle and with hearts being drained of strength .
And warn the people of the Day when the torment will come upon them . Those who will have been doing injustice will say : O our Lord , grant us respite for a while so that we may accept Your message and follow the Messengers . ( It will be said to them : ) Are you not those who used to swear before that you would never fall ?
And ( in your own turn ) you were dwelling in the palaces ( vacated by ) those who had wronged their souls ( during their respective eras ) whereas this had dawned on you how We had dealt with them and We also elucidated examples for your ( easy comprehension ) .
And ( having lost their balance intoxicated by wealth and power ) they hatched many plots while Allah had the countermeasures to foil all their plots , although their deceitful strategies were sufficient even to uproot the mountains .
So never think that Allah will ever break His promise with His Messengers . Indeed Allah is Almighty , the Lord of Retribution .
The Day when ( this ) earth will be changed into a different earth and all the heavens will also be changed and the entire mankind will appear before Allah , the One , and the Dominant over all .
And that Day you will see the sinners fettered in chains .
Their garments will be of pitch ( or some inflammable oil ) and the Fire will be enveloping their faces .
So that Allah may requite every soul for ( the deeds ) it has earned . Indeed Allah is Swift in Reckoning .
This ( Quran ) is perfect communication of the Message to mankind so that by means of this they may be warned and that they may conscientiously bear it in mind that He ( Allah ) is One God , and that those who possess wisdom may take advice .
Alif , Lam , Ra . ( Only Allah and the Messenger know the real meaning . ) These are the verses of the ( Glorious ) Book and the Enlightening Quran .
( Watching the scenes of Allahs Mercy on the believers in the Hereafter , ) the disbelievers would persistently aspire : would that they were Muslims !
( Feel not aggrieved . ) Leave them . Let them eat ( and drink ) and make merry and let ( their ) false hopes keep them negligent ( of the Hereafter ) . Then they will come to know ( their end ) soon .
And never have We destroyed any township but that there was for them a known inscription ( law , which they violated and met their fate ) .
No people can go beyond its appointed term nor can they step back ( under the law of rise and fall ) .
And ( the disbelievers ) say ( insolently ) : O man on whom this Quran has been revealed , indeed you are insane .
Why do you not bring us angels if you are truthful ?
We do not send down angels but with the ( judgment of ) Truth ( i . e . We send them down to execute the torment when its time approaches ) and they are not granted respite at that time .
Assuredly We alone have revealed this Glorious Admonition ( the Quran ) , and surely We alone will guard it .
And We indeed sent Messengers before you as well among earlier generations .
And there did not come to them any Messenger but they would mock him .
That is how We infuse this ( mockery and ridicule ) into the hearts of the sinners .
These people will not believe in this ( Quran ) and ( this ) is what has been the practice of the bygone people .
And if We open to them some gate in the heaven ( and also make this possible for them that ) they keep ascending through ( it ) the whole day .
( Even then ) they will certainly say ( this ) : Our eyes have been hypnotized ( through some magic trick and deceit ) , rather we are spellbound .
And indeed We brought into existence constellations in the heavens ( in the form of galaxies to safeguard the planets ) , and adorned this ( spatial universe ) for the beholders .
And We have ensured the protection of this ( system of heavenly universe ) from every outcast Satan ( i . e . from destructive phenomenon of every rebellious force ) .
But anyone who tries to eavesdrop , a ( blazing ) illuminating meteor follows it .
And We have spread out the earth ( despite its being round ) , and We brought about firm mountains in it ( by allying different elements together ) , and in it We provided means of growth to all species in ( requisite ) proportion .
And in it We generated for you means of subsistence and also for those ( human beings , animals and birds ) whom you do not provide for .
And there is not a thing ( in the universe ) but that We have its treasures with Us and We send it down only according to a fixed quantity .
And We send winds carrying the burden of clouds . Then We pour down water from the sky . Then it is you whom We give it to drink , and it is not you who maintain its reservoirs .
And indeed We alone give life and cause death , and We alone are the Inheritor ( and the Owner of all ) .
And surely We know those who lived before you and We also do know those who will come after you .
Verily it is your Lord Who will gather them together ( on the Day of Resurrection ) . Surely He is Most Wise , All - Knowing .
And indeed We originated mans ( chemical ) genesis from that dry sounding clay which , ( first ) having grown old ( and under heat of the sun and other chemical and biological effects ) , had turned into black stinking mud .
And We created jinn before this from a smokeless blazing fire .
And ( call to mind the occasion ) when your Lord said to the angels : I am about to create a human organism from the old ( and ) black stinking , resounding mud .
So when I accomplish bringing his ( physical ) constitution into its perfect real being and breathe My ( Divine ) Spirit into ( the inner self of ) this ( human physical ) organism , then fall down prostrate before him .
So , ( no sooner did the light of Allahs effulgence light in the human organism than ) all the angels fell down in prostration together .
Except Iblis . He refused to join those who prostrated themselves .
( Allah ) said : O Iblis , what has happened to you that you have not joined those who have prostrated themselves ?
( Iblis ) replied : I cannot be the one who should fall down prostrate before a human being You have created from an old ( and ) black stinking and sounding mud .
( Allah ) said : Then get out from here , for you are indeed the cursed one ( the outcast ) .
And , verily , the curse will ( persistently ) rest upon you till the Day of Recompense .
He said : O Lord , then grant me respite till the Day ( when ) people will be raised up ( again ) .
Allah said : So , indeed , you are among those granted respite .
Till the Day of the appointed time ( Resurrection ) .
Iblis said : O Lord , because You have led me astray , I will ( also ) best adorn and embellish for them ( the sins , revolts and violations ) in the earth and will certainly lead all of them astray by all means .
Except for those exalted servants of Yours who have attained freedom ( from my deceits and intrigues of the ill - commanding selves ) .
Allah said : This ( freedom from these deceits and intrigues ) is the ( very ) path that leads straight to My Threshold .
Surely , you will in no way be able to influence My servants ( who have attained this freedom from you ) except the misguided lot who have adopted your way .
And verily the promised place for all of them is Hell .
It has seven doors ; for each one a fixed portion of them has been specified .
Indeed the Godfearing will be amid Gardens and fountains .
( It will be said to them : ) Enter them peacefully , throwing away fears .
And We shall remove from their breasts all spite that they had ( in the world against one another due to misunderstanding ) . They shall be brothers seated on couches face to face ( in Paradise ) .
No discomfort will touch them nor will they be driven out from there .
( O Beloved ! ) Tell My servants : I am Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
And ( also warn ) that : It is My torment which is the most grievous torment .
And relate to them ( also ) the news about the guests of Ibrahim ( Abraham ) .
When they came to Ibrahim ( Abraham ) they greeted ( him with ) : Peace . Ibrahim ( Abraham ) said : We are feeling somewhat afraid of you .
( The guest angels ) said : Do not feel afraid . We give you the glad tidings of ( the birth of ) a son endowed with knowledge and wisdom .
Ibrahim ( Abraham ) said : You are giving me the glad tidings at a time when old age has already overtaken me . So what good news are you giving me now ?
They said : We give you good news which is true . So do not lose hope .
Ibrahim ( Abraham ) said : Who can lose hope of his Lords Mercy except the strayed ones ?
Ibrahim ( Abraham ) asked : O deputed angels ( sent by Allah ) , what other assignment do you have ( to accomplish besides these glad tidings for which you have come ) ?
They said : We have been sent towards a sinful people .
Except the family of Lut ( Lot ) all of whom We will indeed save .
With the exception of his wife . We have decided that she shall certainly be among those who stay back ( to become the victims of the torment ) .
Then , when those deputed ( angels ) came to the house of Lut ( Lot ) .
Lut ( Lot ) said : Indeed you are ( looking ) strangers .
They said : ( No indeed ; ) in fact we have come to you with the ( punishment ) about which these people have had doubts .
And we have brought to you ( the judgment of ) the Truth and we are certainly truthful .
So set off with your family sometime during the night and follow them in the rear and none of you must ( even ) look back , and proceed to the place ( where ) you have been commanded to .
And We informed Lut ( Lot ) of this judgment through Revelation that the root of these people shall be cut off the moment it dawns .
And the people of the city ( possessed by their lust ) approached ( Lut [ Lot ] ) rejoicing .
Lut ( Lot ) said : Surely they are my guests , so do not put me to shame ( about them ) .
And fear ( the wrath of ) Allah and do not humiliate me .
Those ( lost in wickedness ) said : ( O Lut [ Lot ] , ) did we not forbid you ( providing protection to ) all the people of the world ?
Lut ( Lot ) said : There are my ( peoples ) daughters . If you desire to do something ( then marry them instead of perpetrating indecency ) .
( O Glorious Beloved ! ) By your ( sacred ) life , surely these people ( too ) are wandering astray , possessed by their lust ( like the people of Lut [ Lot ] ) .
So , the blazing Blast seized them at sunrise .
And We turned their town upside down and rained upon them stones of baked clay .
Verily in this ( occurrence ) there are Signs for those who possess the ability to probe into reality .
And truly that town lies along a frequented highway .
Surely in this ( episode of the people of Lut [ Lot ] ) there is a Sign of ( warning ) for the believers .
And , in reality , the dwellers of al - Aika ( the Thick Wood ) too were hardened wrongdoers .
So We avenged Ourselves on them ( as well ) and both these ( towns still exist ) on the highway .
And no doubt the people of the valley of al - Hijr ( the Rock ) too denied the Messengers .
And We bestowed upon them ( also ) Our Signs but they persisted in turning away from them .
And they used to carve out houses in the mountains without any threat and fear .
And the dreadful Blast seized them ( as well ) the moment it dawned .
So the ( riches ) they used to earn could not repel ( Allahs punishment ) from them .
And We have not created the heavens and the earth and whatever is between them without any purpose . And the Hour of Resurrection is certainly approaching . So , ( O embodiment of excellent morality , ) bear with ( them ) most graciously and effectively with perseverance .
Indeed your Lord alone is the Creator of all things , All - Knowing .
And surely We have bestowed upon you the seven oft - recited Verses ( i . e . chapter al - Fatiha ) and the Glorious Quran .
Do not even lift your eyes towards the things with which We have benefitted the disbelievers for their ( few days ) luxury , nor grieve over their ( turning away from the straight path ) , and keep your wings ( of affection and care ) lowered over the believers ( to make them feel contented and cared for ) .
And say : Indeed I am ( now ) the open and clear Warner ( of Allahs torment ) .
The ( torment ) that We sent down upon the dividers ( i . e . the Jews and the Christians ) .
Those who divided the Quran into pieces ( and split it i . e . accepted the favourable verses but rejected the others ) .
So , by your Lord , We shall indeed interrogate them all .
Pertaining to the works that they used to do .
So declare openly all those ( matters ) that you have been commanded and turn away from those who set up partners with Allah .
Surely We suffice you for ( taking them to task ) who scoff .
Who set up other gods along with Allah . So they will come to know ( their end ) soon .
And We indeed know that your ( sacred ) breast feels straitened by what they say .
So glorify your Lord with His praise and live among those who prostrate themselves before Him .
And worship your Lord till you attain to that station of certainty of faith ( which goes with your glory i . e . perfect cognizance of divinity or the moment of union with the Divine Essence ) .
The promise of Allah has drawn ( near ) , so do not hasten in seeking it . Holy is He and exalted far above those objects which the disbelievers set up as ( His ) peers .
He alone sends down the angels by His Command with Revelation ( which is the spirit of all the teachings of Din [ Religion ] ) to those of His servants He likes : Warn ( the people ) that there is no God except Me , so adopt fearing Me against all evils .
He alone has created the heavens and the earth with a zero - defect strategy . He is exalted far above those objects which the disbelievers set up as ( His ) peers .
He alone has created man from a drop of vital fluid , yet he has become openly contentious ( instead of becoming totally submissive to Allah ) .
And He alone has created for you cattle . They are for you a source of warm clothing and ( other ) benefits . And you ( also ) eat some of them .
And there is beauty in them ( and also a joy an aesthetic pleasure ) for you when you drive ( them back ) in the evening from pasture and when you drive ( them ) out in the morning ( to graze ) .
And these ( animals also ) carry your loads to those distant cities ( and remote areas ) where you cannot reach ( otherwise ) without toiling hard . Surely your Lord is Most Clement , Ever - Merciful .
And ( He is the One Who has created ) horses , mules and donkeys so that you may ride them and that they may serve as means of adornment ( for you ) as well and He will ( further ) create ( such ornamented means of conveyance ) that you do not know ( today ) .
And the middle course reaches ( the door of ) Allah and many crooked side tracks also ( branch off ) from it . And had He so willed , He would have guided all of you .
He is the One Who has sent down for you water from the sky . ( Some ) of it is to drink and ( some ) of it is for plantation . ( You grow with it plants , vegetation and pastures ) wherein you take ( your cattle ) to graze .
With the same water He grows for you crops and olives and date - palms and grapes and all kinds of fruit . Indeed there are Signs in it for those who reflect and meditate .
And He ( is the One Who ) has subjected to your service the night and the day and the sun and the moon , and all the stars have also been made subservient to ( the system according to ) His strategy . Surely there are Signs in it for those who possess reason .
And ( of the animal world , vegetable world and minerals ) whatever He has created for you in the earth which have separate colours ( genders , species , classes , characteristics and benefits , etc . all have been subdued to your service ) . Verily , there is a Sign in it for those who take advice .
And He is the One Who has subjected sea ( rivers and oceans ) as well ( in addition to air and land ) so that you may eat fresh ( and favourite ) seafood from there and may take out from them gems ( etc . ) that you wear as ornaments . And , ( O man , ) you see the vessels ( and ships ) that pierce through the water ( of the rivers and oceans ) . And ( all this has been managed ) so that you may look for His bounty ( i . e . sustenance , far and wide ) and also that you may become thankful .
And He is the One Who has created firm mountains in the earth ( by allying various elements ) lest it tremors while carrying you ( revolving in its orbit ) , and rivers and ( also natural ) routes so that you may find way ( to reach the destinations ) .
And set up landmarks ( to navigate during the day ) . And ( at night as well ) people find ( their ) way by means of the stars .
Can the Creator Who creates ( all that ) be like the one who cannot create ( anything ) ? Do you not then accept advice ?
And if you want to count the favours of Allah , you will not be able to number them all . Surely Allah is Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
And Allah knows what you hide and what you show .
And the ( idols ) whom these ( polytheists ) worship besides Allah cannot create anything ; they have rather been created themselves .
( They ) are non - living , inanimate objects which do not ( even ) sense when the people will be raised up .
Your God is One God . So those who do not believe in the Hereafter are deniers at heart and are beliers and arrogant .
This is verily true and established that Allah knows all that they hide and all that they show . Surely He does not like the defiers and arrogant .
And when they are asked : What has your Lord sent down ? they retort : False fables of the people gone by ( have been sent down ) .
( They are making all these utterances ) so that they may carry full load ( of their evildoings ) on the Day of Resurrection and also ( carry ) some load of those that they are misguiding due to ( their ) ignorance . Beware ! It is an extremely evil load which they are carrying .
No doubt those who lived before them ( also ) devised plots , but Allah knocked down the edifice ( of their deceptive plots ) from its foundations , and the roof caved in upon them , and the torment came at them from where they never thought of .
Then He will humiliate them on the Day of Resurrection and say : Where are those that you set up as peers to Me and in whose favour you disputed ( with the believers ) ? Those endowed with knowledge will say : Today ( all types of ) humiliation and destruction will surely befall the disbelievers .
Whom the angels cause to die while they are ( constantly ) doing wrong to their own souls . They will display obedience and submission ( on the Day of Resurrection and say : ) We were not used to doing any evil ( in the world ) . No indeed ! Allah surely has thorough knowledge of what you used to do .
So , enter the gates of Hell . You are its permanent residents . So how evil is the abode of the arrogant !
And ( when ) the Godfearing are asked : What has your Lord sent down ? they say : All good ( for here and the Hereafter has been sent down ) . There is good for those who do good in this world ( too ) , and certainly the House of the Hereafter is even better . And how excellent is the house of those who are Godfearing !
There are Gardens of Eternity which they will enter with streams flowing under them . Therein will be ( available ) whatever they will long for . That is how Allah rewards the God - fearing .
The angels take their lives while they are pure , clean , pleased and contented ( due to obedience and piety . The angels tell them the moment they take their lives : ) Peace be upon you . Enter Paradise due to ( the pious deeds ) that you used to do .
And what else are they waiting for except that the angels should come to them or there should reach the command ( of torment ) from your Lord ? Those before them ( also ) did the same . And Allah did not do them any wrong but they themselves used to wrong their own souls .
So the punishments that came upon them were due to the acts that they had perpetrated , and the same ( chastisement ) they used to make fun of engulfed them .
And those who set up peers with Allah say : Had Allah so willed , We would not have worshipped anything apart from Him , neither we nor our fathers . Nor would we have forbidden anything without His ( Command ) . Those before them ( also ) did the same . Are the Messengers responsible for anything in addition to conveying clearly ( the Message and Commandments of Allah ) ?
And indeed We sent a Messenger in every people : ( O people , ) worship Allah and keep away from Taghut ( i . e . Satan and idol - worship ) . Then some among them were those whom Allah guided , and there were others among them for whom misguidance proved ( appropriate ) . So travel through the land and see what was the end of those who belied ( the Truth ) !
If you ardently desire them to take the path of guidance then ( let not your sanctified disposition be overburdened ) , for indeed Allah does not guide him whom He holds strayed , nor do they have any helpers .
And they swear by Allah most earnestly that Allah will not resurrect him who dies . No Indeed ! The true promise is a bountiful obligation upon Him , but most people do not know .
( The dead will be raised up again ) so that He makes evident ( the Truth ) wherein they disagree and that the disbelievers may realize that they alone are in fact liars .
Our Command for a thing is but only this much that when We intend ( to bring ) it ( into existence ) We say to it : Be , and it becomes .
And those who emigrated after they had been subjected to ( different kinds of ) torture and brutality , We will certainly provide them with a better abode in this ( very ) world . And the reward in the Hereafter is certainly greater . Would that they knew ( this secret )
Those who remain steadfast and put their trust in their Lord !
And before you also We sent only men as Messengers towards whom We sent Our Revelations . So if you yourselves do not know ( anything ) , then ask the People of Remembrance .
( They too were sent ) with clear proofs and the Books . And , ( O Glorious Messenger , ) We have revealed to you the Glorious Reminder ( the Quran ) so that you may explain clearly to people ( the Message and the Commandments ) that have been sent down to them and that they may meditate .
Have these evil and deceitful people gone free of the fear that Allah may sink them into the earth , or may send to them torment from ( any ) quarter that is beyond their imagination ?
Or He may seize them during their movements ( travelling and business trips ) . So , they cannot hinder Allah .
Or He may seize them for being struck with fear . Indeed your Lord is Most Compassionate , Ever - Merciful .
Have they not seen those ( shady ) objects which Allah has created ; their shadows keep crawling on the right and the left sides prostrating themselves before Allah ? And , ( in fact , in this way ) they display humbleness and obedience .
And whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth , all living beings and angels prostrate themselves before Allah ( alone ) and are not ( in the least ) proud and arrogant .
They keep fearing their Lord , Who is high above them , and obey whatever the command they are given .
And Allah has ordained : Do not take two gods ; assuredly He ( Allah ) alone is the only One God . So fear Me alone persistently .
And whatever is in the heavens and the earth ( all ) belongs to Him alone , and obligatory ( for all ) is obedience to Him alone . Do you then fear ( anyone ) other than Allah ?
And whatever blessing you have been provided with is from Allah alone . Then , when some distress afflicts you , you wail and weep only before Him .
Then , when Allah removes that distress from you , a party from amongst you starts setting up partners with their Lord .
( This disbelief and polytheism is perpetrated ) so that they may show ingratitude for those ( blessings ) which We have bestowed upon them . So , ( O polytheists , ) take this ( a few days ) benefit , then soon will you know ( your end ) .
And they ascribe a portion of the provisions which We have given them for those ( idols ) whose ( reality ) even they themselves do not know . By Allah , you will indeed be asked about what you fabricate .
And they ( the disbelievers and polytheists ) ascribe daughters to Allah . Glory be to Him , ( He is far above that ; ) and for themselves they prefer what they desire ( i . e . sons ) .
And when the news ( of the birth ) of a daughter is disclosed to any of them , his face turns dark and he gets pent up with anger .
He seeks to hide himself from people due to the ( presumed ) bad news that is given to him . ( He now gets down to thinking ) whether he should keep her ( alive ) despite humiliation and disgrace or bury her ( alive ) in the earth . See ! How wicked is the decision that they make !
( This ) is the most evil attribute of those who do not believe in the Hereafter and the most exalted attribute is only Allahs . And He is Almighty , Most Wise .
And had Allah seized people ( instantly ) for their injustice , He would not have left any living being ( on the surface of the earth ) . But He grants them respite till an appointed term . When their fixed time arrives then they can neither advance nor hold it back for a single moment .
And they attribute to Allah what they loathe ( for themselves ) and their tongues utter falsehood that there is good for them . ( No indeed ! ) The truth is that for them there is Hell , and they will be the first ones to be sent ( into Hell where they shall be left forever ) .
By Allah ! We certainly sent Messengers to ( many ) people before you ( also ) . Then Satan made their ( evil ) deeds look attractive and pleasing to them . So the same ( Satan ) is today their friend . And for them there is painful punishment .
And We have not revealed to you the Book except that you may explain those ( matters ) clearly to them in which they differ , and ( also that this Book ) is guidance and mercy for the people that have embraced faith .
And Allah pours down water from the sky and by means of that brings the earth to life ( i . e . makes it fertile and green ) after it has become dead ( i . e . barren and infertile ) . Surely there is in it a Sign for those who give ear ( to advice ) .
And indeed in the cattle ( too ) there is a point for you to ponder . We provide you with pure milk to drink brought forth from that substance of their bellies ( which is produced by ) compounding ( certain ) intestinal contents and blood and which freshens up those who drink it .
And you obtain sugar and ( other ) fine foods from the fruits of date - palms and grapes . Indeed there is a Sign in it for those who have reason .
And your Lord seeded ( the idea instinctually ) in the honeybees heart : Make your hives in certain mountains and certain trees and ( also ) in certain projections which people build aloft ( like roofs ) .
So , suck the juice of all kinds of fruit and then follow those routes ( suggested ) by your Lord ( which lead to these fruits and flowers of which you are to suck the juice , leading other bees also to the source ) for their convenience . There oozes from their bellies a syrup ( that is honey ) of diverse colours . It has healing properties for the people . Therein is indeed a Sign for those who apply their minds .
And Allah has brought you into being ; then He causes you to die ( i . e . takes your life ) ; and He turns some of you to the most worthless age ( senility ) so that after knowing ( so much in life ) he should now know nothing ( i . e . man may see to his helplessness and paucity of resources before death ) . Surely Allah is All - Knowing , All - Powerful .
And Allah has preferred some of you to others in ( grades of ) provision , ( so that He may bring you to trial through the command of spending in His way ) . But those who have been preferred do not divert ( even a portion of ) their wealth to ( i . e . do not spend on ) their dependants while they all are equal in it ( as for as their basic necessities are concerned ) . So do they deny Allahs favour ?
And Allah has created for you spouses from among yourselves , and has created through your mates ( wives ) sons and grandsons and provided you with pure sustenance . Do they still believe in falsehood ( abandoning the Truth ) and disregard Allahs favours ?
And besides Allah they worship those ( idols ) who are helpless to provide them with any provision from the heavens and the earth , and nor do they have any power .
So never put forward any similitude about Allah . Surely Allah knows and you do not .
Allah has explained an example ( that ) there is a slave , possessed by ( some master ) , having no control over anything ( himself ) ; and ( the other ) is the one We have given the best provision , so he gives out to others out of it secretly and openly : can the two be held equal ? All praise belongs to Allah alone . But most of them do not know ( even the basic reality ) .
And Allah has illustrated an example of two ( such ) men of whom one is dumb , has no power over anything and is a burden on his master ; wherever he ( the master ) sends him , he brings no good . Can he ( the dumb ) be the equal to the ( other ) one who ( holds such an office that he ) enjoins the people to do justice , and he himself also follows the straight path ?
And to Allah belongs ( all ) the unseen of the heavens and the earth and the advent of the Last Hour will be as quick as twinkling of an eye or even faster . Surely Allah has Mighty Control over everything .
And Allah brought you forth from the wombs of your mothers ( in such a state ) that you knew nothing , and He endowed you with ears and eyes and hearts so that you may give thanks .
Have they not seen the birds that fly aloft in the air ( under the law of motion and aerodynamics ) ? Nothing but ( the laws of ) Allah hold them ( in the sky ) . Surely there are Signs in ( this law of aerodynamics ) for the believers .
And Allah has made your homes ( permanent ) places for you to reside and made for you ( temporary ) dwellings ( i . e . tents ) with the skins of cattle which you find light enough during your journey and for ( stay at journey - breaking ) halts . And ( Allah is the One Who ) provides you with household goods and profitable means ( in business and trade ) from the wool of sheep and lambs and fur of camels and hair obtained from goats , ( which are ) for an appointed term .
And Allah is the One Who has made for you shades of many things that He created , and He has made places of shelter for you in the mountains , and He has made ( some ) such clothes for you as protect you from heat and ( others like ) coats of armour which shield you ( against the enemy assault ) during the event of intense war . Thus Allah perfects His favour and blessing ( provision and protection ) upon you so that you may bow down ( before His Presence ) with absolute submissiveness .
So if ( even then ) they turn away ( O Glorious Messenger , ) then your responsibility is only to convey and communicate ( My Message and My Commands ) clearly .
They recognize Allahs favour , then deny it and most of them are disbelievers .
And the Day when We shall raise from every people ( their Messenger as ) a witness ( to their deeds ) , then the disbelievers will not be accorded permission ( to put forward any excuse ) , nor will they be asked ( then ) to turn to Allah in repentance .
And when the wrongdoers see the torment , neither will ( this torment ) be mitigated for them , nor will they be granted any respite .
And when the idolaters see their ( self - made ) partners , they will say : O our Lord , these are our partner - gods which we worshipped besides You . Thereupon those ( partner - gods ) will send them the message ( in reply ) : You are liars indeed .
And that Day these ( polytheists ) will show humbleness and obedience to Allah , and all falsehood that they used to fabricate will vanish from them .
Those who disbelieved and kept hindering ( others ) from the path of Allah , We shall add torment to their torment because they used to spread mischief and spoil peace .
And ( this ) will be the Day ( when ) We shall raise in every people one witness against them from among themselves , and , ( O Venerable Beloved , ) We shall bring you as witness to all of them ( communities and Messengers ) . And We have revealed to you that Glorious Book which is a clear exposition of everything and is guidance , mercy and glad tidings for the believers .
Indeed Allah enjoins justice and benevolence ( towards everyone ) , and giving away to the kindred and forbids indecency , evil deeds , defiance and disobedience . He admonishes you so that you may remember with concern .
And always fulfil the promise of Allah when you promise , and do not break oaths after making them firm while you have already made Allah a surety over you . Surely Allah knows well whatever you do .
And do not be like the woman who after spinning her yarn firm and strong breaks it into pieces . You employ your oaths as a means of deceiving among you so that ( by this ) one party may earn more profit than the other . The matter is that Allah ( also ) puts you to trial through the same , and on the Day of Resurrection He will certainly make clear those matters in which you used to disagree .
And had Allah so willed He would have made ( all ) of you one Umma ( Community ) but He holds strayed whom He wills and leads to guidance whom He wills . And you will surely be asked about the deeds you used to do .
And do not use your oaths as a means of deceiving among you lest your foot should quiver after it is set firmly ( in Islam ) and you will taste the evil result because you used to hinder ( the people ) from the path of Allah . And there is severe torment for you .
And do not barter the promise made to Allah for a paltry price ( i . e . worldly wealth and gains ) . Surely ( the reward ) that is with Allah is best for you if you know ( this secret ) .
The ( riches ) that you possess will be no more and what is with Allah will last . And those who remain steadfast We shall certainly pay their recompense for their righteous deeds which they used to do .
Whoever performs pious works , man or woman provided he or she is a believer , We will surely let such a one live a life of purity and will indeed reward them ( as well ) their wage of the righteous works which they used to do .
So when you undertake to recite the Quran , seek refuge with Allah against ( the wiles of ) Satan , the outcast .
Surely he has no control ( at all ) over those who believe and put their trust in their Lord .
He overpowers only those who make friends with him and who associate partners with Allah .
And when We substitute some Verse in place of another Verse , and Allah ( alone ) knows best whatever He sends down , ( then ) the disbelievers say : You are but a forger ! But most of them do not know ( the rationale of sending down and substituting the verses ) .
Say : The Holy Spirit ( Gabriel ) has brought it ( the Quran ) down from your Lord with truth so as to keep the believers firm - footed and ( this ) is guidance and good news for the believers .
And indeed We know that they ( the disbelievers and the polytheists ) say : It is but a human being who teaches him this ( Quran ) . But the person they point to , turning the matter away from the truth , is the one whose language is non - Arabic and this Quran is ( in ) clear and unambiguous Arabic language .
Surely those who do not believe in the Revelations of Allah , Allah does not provide them with guidance ( i . e . does not also enable them with understanding and insight ) . And for them is grievous torment .
Indeed they alone invent false fabrications who do not believe in the Revelations of Allah and they alone are liars .
The one who disbelieves after having believed , except someone who is coercively forced to do so and at heart remains contented with belief ( as before ) , but ( of course ) he who ( adopts ) disbelief ( afresh ) wholeheartedly with an open mind , on them is wrath from Allah and for them is fierce torment .
That is because they loved and preferred the life of this world to the Hereafter and because Allah does not guide the disbelieving folk .
They are those whose hearts and whose ears and whose eyes Allah has sealed and they are the ones who are neglectful ( of their end in the Hereafter ) .
It is a fact that these are certainly those who are the losers in the Hereafter .
Then your Lord , for those who emigrated ( i . e . left their homes and towns for the cause of Allah ) after they had been made to suffer from trials ( and adversities ) , then fought in the way of Allah and remained steadfast ( in the face of worries ) ; after that , ( O Glorious Beloved , ) your Lord is Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
And ( recall the time ) that Day when every person will appear pleading for himself ( in his defence ) , and every soul will be given full recompense for whatever it will have done , and they will not be wronged in the least .
And Allah has described the example of a township which was ( living ) in peace and contentment . The means of sustenance came to ( its residents ) in abundance from all quarters . Then the ( dwellers ) of this town disregarded Allahs blessings and showed ingratitude . Thereupon Allah clothed them in the torment of hunger and fear due to the activities that they used to carry out .
And indeed there came to them from among themselves a Messenger but they denied him . So the torment seized them and they were certainly the wrongdoers .
So always eat of that clean and lawful sustenance which Allah has given you and thank for the favour of Allah if you worship but Him alone .
He has forbidden you only carrion , blood , the flesh of swine and ( the animal ) on which the name of other than Allah is invoked at the time of slaughter . But he who is faced with survival condition ( forced by necessity ) , neither defying ( against Allahs injunctions seeking taste of lust ) , nor transgressing ( the limit of necessity ) , then Allah is surely Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
And do not tell a lie which your tongues utter : This is lawful and that is forbidden , thus fabricating a lie against Allah . Indeed those who fabricate lies against Allah will ( never ) be delivered .
There is only a little profit but the torment for them is painful ( beyond proportion ) .
And We made unlawful for the Jews the same things that We have mentioned to you before and We did not wrong them but they used to wrong their souls themselves .
Indeed your Lord , for those who committed wrongs out of ignorance , then turned to Him in repentance and amended ( their ) state , then surely after that your Lord is Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
Surely Ibrahim ( Abraham ) was an Umma ( [ Community ] in himself ) , exclusively obedient to Allah , turning away from all falsehood ( ever inclined and given to Him alone ) and was not of those who associate partners with Allah .
Grateful to ( Allah ) for His blessings . Allah chose him ( and exalted him to a high office in His Presence ) and guided him to the straight path .
And We bestowed upon him good in this world , and he will surely be of the upright in the Hereafter ( as well ) .
Then , ( O Glorious Beloved , ) We sent down Revelation to you : Follow Din ( Religion ) of Ibrahim ( Abraham ) , who was at variance with every falsehood and was not of those who associate partners with Allah .
Saturday ( the Sabbath ) was ordained only for those who differed about it , and indeed your Lord will judge among them on the Day of Resurrection ( in the matters ) in which they used to differ .
( O Glorious Messenger ! ) Invite towards the path of your Lord with strategic wisdom and refined exhortation and ( also ) argue with them in a most decent manner . Surely your Lord knows him well who strayed away from His path and He also knows well the rightly guided .
And if you want to punish , then punish only ( as severely ) as you were afflicted , but if you remain patient then certainly that is better for those who keep patience .
And , ( O Glorious Beloved , ) be patient and your patience is by Allah alone . And you should not grieve over their ( defiance ) , nor distress ( your gracious and benevolent heart ) on account of their deceptive plots .
Surely Allah blesses them with His ( special ) companionship who live with Godwariness and who ( also ) live with spiritual excellence .
Holy ( free of any imperfection , weakness and insufficiency ) is He Who took His ( most beloved and intimate ) Servant in a small portion of a night from the Sacred Mosque to the al - Aqsa Mosque , whose surroundings We have blessed , in order that We might show him ( the Perfect Servant ) Our Signs . Surely He is the One Who is All - Hearing , All - Seeing .
And We gave Musa ( Moses ) the Book ( the Torah ) and made it guidance for the Children of Israel ( and enjoined them : ) Do not take anyone other than Me as Guardian .
( O ) children of those whom We carried ( in the Ark ) with Nuh ( Noah ) ! Indeed Nuh ( Noah ) was a highly grateful servant .
And We categorically conveyed to the Children of Israel in the Book : You shall make mischief twice in the land and employ a violent defiance ( against obedience to Allah ) .
So when the promised first time of the two came to pass We brought upon you those of Our servants who were great warriors . Then , in ( your ) search they penetrated up to your dwellings . And ( this ) promise was sure to be fulfilled .
Then We turned the victory over them to your favour and helped you with ( affluence in ) wealth and children and increased your numerical strength ( as well ) .
If you do good , you do it ( only ) for your own benefit but if you do evil , you will sin against your own souls . Then , when the hour of second promise came ( We sent against you other tyrants ) so that , ( lashing and whipping , ) they should deform your faces and enter the al - Aqsa Mosque ( the same way ) as ( the invaders ) had entered it the first time and so that they completely destroy whatever ( place ) they overpower .
It may well be that ( after this ) your Lord will have mercy on you , but if you revert to the same ( rebellious and defiant behaviour ) , then We too will get back to the same ( tormenting once again ) . And We have made Hell a prison for the disbelievers .
Indeed this Quran leads to that ( destination ) which is most right , and gives this good news to those believers who do righteous works , that for them is a mighty reward .
And that those who do not believe in the Hereafter , We have prepared for them painful punishment .
And ( intolerant and anguished ) man prays ( sometimes ) for evil as he prays for good ( for himself ) . And man has happened to be very impulsive indeed .
And We have made the night and the day two Signs ( of Our Might ) . Then We made the Sign of the night dark and We made the Sign of the day bright so that you may look for your Lords bounty ( provision ) and that you may work out the number of years and do reckoning and We have made everything clear in detail .
And We have slung every mans record of deeds around his neck , and on the Day of Resurrection We shall bring forth ( this ) record which he will find spread out ( before him ) .
( It will be said to him : ) Read your book ( of deeds ) . Today you yourself are enough for examining your own account .
Whoever adopts the path of guidance follows it to his own benefit and whoever goes astray , then evil consequences of his error also fall back on him alone . And no bearer of burden will bear the burden ( of the sins ) of any other . And We do not torment ( any people ) at all until We send a Messenger ( to them ) .
And when We resolve to destroy a town , We send ( some ) command to the rich and the affluent among them ( so that the common man and the poor too may make amends ) but they act disobediently in ( the town ) . Thus Our decree ( of torment ) becomes due against it . Then We totally smash that town .
And how many a community have We destroyed after Nuh ( Noah ) ! And your Lord is Sufficient . ( He ) is Well Aware of the sins of His servants , All - Seeing .
Whoever longs for ( quick recompense for his labour in the form of ) worldly riches alone , We readily grant whatever We like to whoever We please , here in this world . Thereafter , We have set up Hell for him which he will enter hearing condemnation and contempt , rejected ( from the mercy of his Lord ) .
And whoever longs for the Hereafter and toils for it befittingly and he is a believer ( as well ) , it is they whose struggle will earn recognition .
We extend help to all : those ( ambitious of this world ) as well as those ( aspiring to the Hereafter . O Glorious Beloved , all this ) is of your Lords Bestowal . And the Bestowal of your Lord is not forbidden ( to ) and restricted ( to anyone ) .
See how We have exalted some of them above the others ! And surely the Hereafter ( as compared to this world ) is far greater in terms of degrees and in terms of superiority ( as well ) .
( O listener ! ) Do not set up another god along with Allah ( lest ) you should sit back condemned ( and ) forsaken .
And your Lord has commanded you not to worship anyone other than Allah and treat the parents with benevolence . If either or both of them attain to old age in your presence , then do not say even Ugh ! to them nor reproach them . And always speak to both of them submissively , observing polite manners .
And always lower your arms of submissiveness and humility out of soft - heartedness for both of them and keep supplicating ( Allah ) : O my Lord , have mercy on both of them as they brought me up in ( my ) childhood ( with mercy and clemency ) .
Your Lord is well aware of the ( matters and intentions ) that are in your hearts . If you acquire righteous conduct then surely He ( Allah ) is Most Forgiving to those who turn ( towards Him ) .
And give to the kindred their rightful due and also ( give ) to the needy and the wayfarer and do not exhaust ( your wealth ) by expending wastefully .
Surely the spendthrifts are the brothers of Satan , and Satan is most ungrateful to his Lord .
And if , in waiting for your Lords mercy ( i . e . prosperity ) which you look forward to , you seek to avoid these ( deserving ones due to scarcity of means ) , then say to them kind words .
And neither keep your hand tied to your neck ( giving nothing to anyone ) nor stretch it wide open ( giving away all ) lest you should sit back blamed ( and ) consumed .
Truly your Lord opens up sustenance for whom He pleases and folds up ( for whom He wills ) . Verily , He is All - Knowing of His servants ( works and affairs ) , All - Seeing .
And do not kill your children due to fear of poverty . We alone provide for them and for you ( as well ) . Indeed killing them is a major sin .
And do not even go near unlawful sex ( adultery ) . Verily it is an act of lewdness and is the most evil way .
Do not kill any soul whose ( killing ) Allah has declared unlawful unless ( killing him ) is just ( according to the law of Sharia ) . But whoever is killed unjustly , We have indeed given to his heir the right ( of retribution ) , but he too has not to exceed limits in killing ( by way of retribution ) . He is indeed helped ( by Allah . The responsibility of his help and support will be on the government . )
And do not ( also ) go near the orphans property but in a way that is beneficial ( to the orphan ) until he reaches his maturity . And do fulfil the promise . No doubt the promise will be questioned about .
And measure in full whenever you measure out ( anything ) , and ( when you weigh anything ) weigh with a straight balance . This ( honesty ) is better and much better with regard to its consequence ( as well ) .
And , ( O man , ) do not follow that of which you have no ( authentic ) knowledge . Indeed the ear , the eye and the heart each of them will be questioned .
And do not walk arrogantly on earth . Certainly you cannot cleave the earth ( with the force of your arrogance ) , nor can you reach the mountains in height . ( You will remain what you are . )
The evil of all these ( mentioned ) acts is most despicable to your Lord .
This is of those wisdom - loaded values which your Lord has revealed to you and , ( O man , ) do not set up another god with Allah ( lest ) you should be cast into Hell cursed ( and ) rejected ( from Allahs Mercy ) .
( O idolaters ! Think for yourselves ! ) Has your Lord picked you for sons and taken ( for Himself ) angels as daughters ? Indeed you utter a most awful saying ( in the framework of your own fabricated ideas ) .
And surely We have explained ( facts and admonitions ) in this Quran repeatedly and alternating styles so that people may take direction and guidance , but ( the disbelievers state of mind is such that ) this only increases their hatred .
Say : Had there been some other gods with Him , as they ( the idolaters and the disbelievers ) say , then they would certainly have ( jointly ) found some passage to reach the Lord of the Throne ( to interfere in His Command and Control System ) .
Holy is He and Most Exalted and Most High , far above all that they keep saying .
The seven heavens and the earth and all that exists in them persistently extol the Glory of Allah and there is not a single object ( in the entire universe ) but it glorifies Him with His Praise . Yet you cannot appreciate their ( state of ) glorification . He is surely Most Forbearing , Most Forgiving .
And when you recite the Quran , ( then ) We place an imperceptible veil between you and those who do not believe in the Hereafter .
And We ( also ) cover their hearts in wrappers so that they may ( not ) get to its meaning and plug their ears with a sensation of heaviness ( so that they may not listen to it ) . And when you mention your Lord alone in the Quran ( and the names of their idols are not mentioned ) then , in extreme dislike , they turn their backs and flee away .
We know best the motive with which they listen to with active attention when they give you ears , and when they whisper and when these wrongdoers say ( to the Muslims ) : You are following only a person that is bewitched ( i . e . a spell has been cast on him . And We see and hear all this ) .
( O Beloved ! ) See what similes ( these people ) find for you ! So they have gone astray . Now they are unable to find a way to the right path .
And they say : When we shall become ( decomposed ) bones and dust particles ( after dying ) , shall we be raised up alive anew ?
Say : ( Yes , even though ) be you stones or iron .
Or any other created matter which you deem even harder ( than these things and which is not susceptible to becoming a living thing ) . Then ( in this condition ) they will say : Who will bring us back to life ? Say : He Who created you the first time . They will then shake their heads at you ( by way of wonder and ridicule ) and will say : When will it happen ? Say : It is expected to occur soon .
The Day when He will call you , you will respond praising Him , deeming that you tarried ( in the world ) for only a short while .
And tell My servants that they should say things that are most balanced . Surely Satan causes contention among people . Indeed Satan is mans declared enemy .
Your Lord is well aware of your state of affairs . If He wills , He may have mercy on you or if He likes , He may torment you . And We have not sent you as a guardian over them ( to care for all their matters ) .
And your Lord knows them best who ( live ) in the heavens and the earth . And surely We exalted some Messengers above the others and bestowed the Zabur ( Psalms ) upon Dawud ( David ) .
Say : Call all those that you consider ( gods ) apart from Allah . They do not have the power to remove distress from you , nor ( have they the capability ) to shift ( it to others ) .
Those that they worship ( i . e . they prepare sculptures and images of angels , jinn , the Prophets Isa [ Jesus ] , Uzair [ Ezra ] and others and worship them ) look for mediation to their Lord ( themselves ) as to who among them is most intimate ( in the Presence of Allah ) . And ( they ( themselves ) hope for His mercy and fear His torment . ( Now say yourselves how they can be gods . They are prostrating themselves before the True God . ) Indeed the torment of your Lord is a thing to fear .
And there is not a community ( comprising disbelievers and the denying rebels ) but We shall destroy it before the Day of Resurrection or afflict it with most severe torment . This ( decree ) is written in the Book ( the Protected Tablet [ al - Lawh al - Mahfuz ] ) .
And ( nothing ) has prevented Us from sending down the Signs ( on their demand even now ) except that the bygone people denied the same ( Signs . Thereupon , they were immediately seized by destruction and were not granted any respite . O Beloved , We do not want to repeat that with your people after We have raised you as Our Messenger . ) And We gave the people of Thamud an open Sign ( of ) a she - camel ( of Salih ) but they did her wrong . And We do not send Signs but to rouse fear ( for the last time before the torment arrives . Then , when that Sign is rejected , the devastating torment is sent forthwith ) .
And ( recall the time ) when We said to you : Indeed your Lord has encompassed ( all ) mankind ( within His knowledge and might ) . And We have made the vision ( on the Night of Ascension ) that We showed you but a trial for the people ; ( the believers believed in it while those having superficial vision got confused ; ) and also that tree ( of Zaqqum ) which has been cursed in the Quran . And We warn them but this ( warning too ) does not add anything to them except greater disobedience and rebelliousness .
And ( call to mind the time ) when We said to the angels : Fall down in prostration before Adam . Then all prostrated themselves except Iblis ( Satan ) . He said : Shall I prostrate myself before him whom You have created of clay .
( And Satan also said : ) Tell me , is it he You have exalted over me ? ( What is its reason after all ? ) If you grant me respite till the Day of Resurrection , I shall root out his children except a few of them ( by bringing them under my control ) .
Allah said : Go ( respite is granted to you ) . So whoever of them follows you , Hell indeed is the only befitting punishment for you all .
And whoever you can influence , destabilize ( him ) with your voice and invade them with ( all the forces at your disposal ) mounted and infantry troops , and become a partner with them in their wealth and children and make them ( false ) promises . And Satan does not make them ( any ) promises but fraud and deceit .
Assuredly you will not be able to overpower those who are My servants , and your Lord is Sufficient to protect and help these ( friends of Allah ) .
Your Lord is He Who makes ( the ships and ) vessels sail in the sea ( and rivers ) for you so that you may look for His bounty ( i . e sustenance through internal and external trade ) . Indeed He is Ever - Merciful towards you .
And when some adversity afflicts you in the sea , then ( all ) those ( idols ) disappear ( from your minds ) you keep worshipping apart from Him ( Allah Whom you remember at that time ) . Then when He rescues you and takes you safe ashore ( you once again ) start turning away ( from Him ) . And man has happened to be extremely thankless !
Do you feel free of this fear that He may sink you ( into the land ) right at the shore or may send to you stone storm ? Then you will not find any helper for yourselves .
Or have you become fearless that He may take you back once more ( into the sea ) and let loose upon you the ship - wrecking tempest and drown you ( into the sea ) because of your disbelief you used to practise . Then you will not find for yourselves anyone to impeach Us ( on this drowning ) .
And We have indeed honoured the children of Adam and provided them with ( means of transport ) over the land and in the sea ( i . e . in the cities , deserts , rivers and oceans ) and bestowed upon them sustenance out of clean and pure things . And We have exalted them above most of Our creation by conferring on them superiority .
( Call to mind ) the Day when We shall call every section of people along with their leaders . So whoever will be given the record of his deeds in his right hand , so they will read their records ( rejoicing ) and they will not be wronged a whit .
And whoever remains blind ( to the Truth ) in this ( world ) will be blind in the Hereafter as well , distracted from the path ( of deliverance ) .
And that is what the disbelievers were up to that they might tempt you away from that ( Commandment ) which We have revealed to you , so that you ascribe to Us some other ( things ) apart from this ( Revelation ) , and then make you their friend .
And had We not ( already ) made you firm - footed ( through holiness and impeccability of Prophethood ) , even then you ( owing to your holy and sanctified self and natural potential ) would have but trivially gone near to inclining towards them . ( You would not have even then bent much towards them and they would have failed . But Allah has protected you from even nearing such a probability through the holiness of Prophethood . )
( But if supposedly you inclined then ) We would make you taste double of the torment in the worldly life and double of the torment in death . You would not then find ( even ) for yourself any helper against Us .
And the disbelievers also sought to shake you off the land ( of Makka ) so that they might banish you from here . ( But had that supposedly happened ) then they ( themselves ) would also not have stayed there but for a little while .
This ( has been ) the practice ( of Allah ) with all those Messengers We sent before you and you will not find any change in Our Way .
Establish the Prayers ( Zuhr [ Midday ] , Asr [ Afternoon ] , Maghrib [ Sunset ] and Isha [ Evening ] ) from the declining of the sun till deep darkness of the night . And also ( make obligatory ) the recitation of Fajr Prayer , for the Quran in Fajr ( Dawn ) Prayer is attended ( by the angels and a state of divine consciousness also permeates ) .
And in some part of the night ( as well , rising from sleep , ) offer the Tahajjud Prayer with the Quran . This is added especially for you . Your Lord will certainly raise you to a station of praise and glory ( i . e . the glorious station of intercession where all the former and later generations will turn towards you and glorify you ) .
And keep praying ( to your Lord ) : O my Lord , make me enter ( wherever You are to make me enter ) with the Truth ( Your pleasure ) , and bring me out ( from wherever You are to bring me out ) with the Truth ( Your pleasure ) . And bestow upon me from Your Presence the dominance that assists and the power that backs .
And say : The Truth has come and falsehood has fled . Surely falsehood has to perish .
And We are sending down in the Quran what is healing and mercy for the believers . And it only increases the wrongdoers in loss .
And when We bestow upon man ( some ) blessing he turns away ( from gratitude ) and escapes , but when some distress comes upon him he despairs ( i . e . he is neither grateful nor patient ) .
Say : Everyone acts according to his own ( respective ) style and nature , and your Lord knows full well who is best guided to the straight path .
And they ( the disbelievers ) ask you about the spirit . Say : The spirit is from my Lords Command and you have been given but a very little knowledge .
And if We so will , We can erase this ( Book ) which We have revealed to you , ( from peoples minds and from the written copies , ) and you will not then find anyone who may plead your case before Us for the communication of this ( Revelation ) .
But that by your Lords Mercy ( We have kept it intact . This ) is indeed His mighty favour to you ( and through you to your Umma [ Community ] ) .
Say : Should all men and jinn join in the attempt to produce ( some other book ) the like of this Quran , ( even ) then they will not be able to produce the like thereof , though they may become supporters to one another .
And surely We have repeatedly explained for people every sort of example in this Quran ( in diverse ways ) , but most people have not accepted ( it . This is nothing ) but sheer ingratitude .
And they ( the disbelievers of Makka ) say : We shall never believe in you until you cause some water spring to gush out of the earth .
Or you have some garden of date - palms and grapes and you may cause streams to flow profusely therein .
Or , as you have an idea , cause some pieces of the sky to fall upon us ( just now ) or bring Allah and the angels before us .
Or you have a house of gold ( wherein you live luxuriously ) or you ascend up to heaven , but even then we will not believe in your ascension ( to the heaven ) until you bring down to us ( from there ) a Book which we may read ( ourselves ) . Say : Holy is my Lord ( far above these vagaries ) . I am only a human being ( and a Messenger ) sent by Allah .
And nothing prevented ( these ) people from believing , while there had come to them guidance ( as well ) , except that they said : Has Allah sent ( a ) man as Messenger ?
Say : Had there been angels ( instead of human beings ) walking about , residing in the earth , then We ( too ) would have certainly sent down from heaven some angel as a Messenger .
Say : Sufficient is Allah for a witness between me and you . Surely He is Well Aware of His servants , All - Seeing .
And he whom Allah guides , then he it is the rightly guided . But he whom He holds astray , you will not find for them any helper except Him . And We shall raise them on the Day of Resurrection prone , blind , dumb and deaf . Hell is their abode . Every time it abates We shall flare it more ablaze ( to torment them ) .
That is their punishment because they denied Our Revelations . And they kept saying : Shall we be raised alive afresh after ( we die ) reduced to ( decomposed ) bones and dust particles ?
Have they not seen that Allah Who has created the heavens and the earth does ( also ) have the power to create the like of these people ( again ) ? And He has fixed a term for them wherein there is no ( chance of ) doubt . The wrongdoers have even then refused to believe but ( this ) is ingratitude .
Say : If you were the owners of the treasures of my Lords Mercy , you would even then hold ( your hands ) back ( from spending ) for fear of ( total ) exhaustion . And man has turned out to be highly narrow - minded and niggardly .
And indeed We bestowed upon Musa ( Moses ) nine bright Signs . And ask the Children of Israel , when ( Musa [ Moses ] ) came to them , Pharaoh said to him : O Musa ( Moses ) , in my opinion you are but a bewitched man ( a spell has been cast upon you ) .
Musa ( Moses ) replied : ( In your heart of hearts ) you know that none has sent down these Signs as a means of warning and insight except the Lord of the heavens and the earth and , O Pharaoh , in my opinion you are a wreck ( i . e . you are going to perish soon ) .
Then ( Pharaoh ) resolved to uproot and cast away ( Musa [ Moses ] and his people ) from the land of ( Egypt ) . So We drowned him and all those who were with him .
Then after this We said to the Children of Israel : Settle in this land . Then when the promise of the Hereafter comes to pass We shall take you all mustered together .
And We have sent down this ( Quran ) with the Truth and it is with the Truth alone that it has come down . And , ( O Glorious Beloved , ) We have sent you but as a Bearer of glad tidings and as a Warner .
And We sent down the Quran piecemeal so that you may recite it to the people distinctly with pauses . And We have revealed it piecemeal gradually ( in accordance with the circumstances and expediencies ) .
Say : Believe in it or not , indeed those who were given the knowledge ( of the Book ) before you , they fall down upon their faces in prostration when this ( Quran ) is recited to them .
And they say : Holy is our Lord . Surely the promise of our Lord was bound to come true .
And they fall down on their faces sighing and wailing , and this ( Quran ) increases on their fear and submissiveness ever more .
Say : Call out Allah or call out ar - Rahman ( the Most Compassionate ) , by whatever Name you invoke Him , ( all ) Best Names are His . And recite ( the Quran in ) your Prayer neither too loud nor too low but adopt a ( middle ) course in between the two .
And say : All praise belongs to Allah alone Who has neither taken any son ( for Himself ) nor is there any partner in ( His ) kingdom and regime and nor has He any aide due to any handicap . ( O Beloved , ) keep extolling His Greatness and Glory with conviction and magnify Him with all His magnificence .
All praise belongs to Allah Who revealed the ( Glorious ) Book to His ( Most Beloved and Intimate ) servant and left not in it any crookedness .
( He made it ) straight and moderate so that he may warn ( the disbelievers ) of fierce torment ( coming ) from Allah and give good news to the believers who do pious deeds that for them is excellent reward ( Paradise ) .
Wherein they will live forever .
And ( moreover ) create fear in those who say that Allah has taken a son ( for Himself ) .
Neither they have any knowledge of it nor had their fathers . How dreadful is ( this ) utterance that is coming out of their mouths ! They speak nothing but ( sheer ) falsehood .
( O Venerable Beloved ! ) Will you put your ( dear ) life at stake with the traumatic grief for them if they do not put faith in this Word ( of Allah ) ?
And indeed We have made whatever is on earth a means of its beauty ( and adornment ) so that We test ( the inhabitants of the earth ) as to who is better on merit of their deeds .
And , surely , We shall reduce it to a barren land ( perishing all ) that is on ( the surface of the earth ) .
Have you thought of it ( how ) wondrous a Sign of the Signs ( of Our Might ) were the people of the Kahf and the Raqim ( i . e . the people of Cave and the Cave Tablet or the Raqim valley ) ?
( Call to mind the time ) when a few youths took refuge in the cave . They said : O our Lord , bestow upon us mercy from Your Presence and provide ( means of ) guidance in our affair .
So We patted their ears ( putting them to slumber ) for some countable years in that cave .
Then We raised them up to see which of the two groups would most rightly calculate ( the time ) that they stayed ( in the cave ) .
We ( now ) narrate to you their actual state of affairs . They were indeed ( a few ) young men who believed in their Lord and We increased for them ( the light of ) guidance .
And We strengthened and stabilized their hearts ( through Our communication and divine affinity ) . When they stood ( before their king ) , they said : Our Lord is the Lord of the heavens and the earth . We shall never worship any ( false ) god besides Him . ( If we do that ) then we shall certainly say something profane .
These are the people of our community who have made many gods apart from Him . Why do they not bring any clear proof ( in support of their godhood ) ? So , who is a greater wrongdoer than he who fabricates a lie against Allah ?
And ( those young men mutually discussed : ) When you have withdrawn yourselves from them and those ( false gods ) which they worship other than Allah , take shelter in ( this ) cave . Your Lord will open up His mercy for you and will facilitate you in your affair .
And you see that the sun , when it rises , moves to the right from their cave and inclines obliquely from them to the left when it sets while they are ( lying ) in the open chamber of the cave . This ( change of the suns course ) is one of the ( great ) Signs of Allahs ( Might ) . He whom Allah guides is the one who is rightly guided , but one whom He holds strayed you will not find for him any wali ( friend to help ) and murshid ( guide to show the path ) .
And , ( O listener , ) if you ( look ) at them , you will deem them awake whereas they are asleep . And We keep changing their sides to the right and to the left ( after regular intervals ) , and their dog is sitting on ( their ) threshold sprawling both its forelegs . Had you glanced peeping at them , you would have run away turning your back on them , and your heart would have been filled with their terror .
And likewise We raised them up so that they could probe among themselves . ( So , ) the vocal one among them said : How long have you stayed ( here ) ? They said : We have tarried ( here ) for a day or ( even ) a part of that . ( Winding it up , they ) said : Your Lord knows best how long you have stayed ( here ) . So send someone of you to the city with this coin of yours . He should then find which food is more lawful and clean and bring you some of that . He should remain slow and polite ( in going , buying and coming back ) , not leaving any clue about you ( even ) to a single person .
Surely if they overpower you ( after becoming aware of you ) , they will surely stone you to death or force you ( through oppression ) to return to their faith . And ( if it so happens ) then you will not prosper at all .
And in this way We unveiled their ( state ) to those ( who succeeded them some centuries later ) so that they might know that Allahs promise is true and ( also ) that there is no doubt about the coming of the Last Hour . ( When these people of the cave died ) and the people of the town developed a dispute concerning their matter , they said : Raise a building over their ( cave as a monument ) . Their Lord knows best their state of ( saintly ) affairs . Those ( believers ) who had the upper hand in their matter said : We shall certainly build a mosque ( at their door so that the believers may pray therein and acquire special bounty by obtaining spiritual nearness to the people of the cave ) .
( Now ) some will say : ( The people of the cave ) were three and the fourth was their dog , and still some will say : ( They ) were five and the sixth was their dog . These are the estimations made without seeing . And others will say : ( They ) were seven and the eighth was their dog . Say : My Lord is the One Who exactly knows their number and none knows their ( exact number ) except a few . So do not discuss about them with anyone except the details that have been revealed . Nor seek any information from any of them ( about the people of the Cave ) .
And never say about anything : I shall do this work tomorrow .
But that : If Allah so wills . ( i . e . saying : Insha Allah ) . And remember your Lord when you forget and say : I believe my Lord will show me the path of guidance which is ( even ) nearer than this one .
And ( the people of the Cave [ Kahf ] ) stayed in their cave for three hundred years and they added another ( nine ) years ( to that ) .
Say : Allah is the One Who knows best for how long they remained ( there ) . He alone knows ( all ) the secrets of the heavens and the earth . How well He sees and how well He hears ! They have no protector besides Him , nor does He share His Sovereignty with anyone .
And recite that ( Revelation ) which has been revealed to you from the Book of your Lord . There is none who can change His Word , nor will you find any place of refuge except with Him .
( O My servant ! ) Stay tenaciously in the companionship of those who remember their Lord morning and evening , ardently seeking His pleasure , ( keen on the glimpse of His sight and eagerly aspiring to glance at His radiant Countenance ) . Your ( affectionate and caring ) looks must not but focus them . Do you seek the charisma of the worldly life ( shifting your attention away from these self - denying devotees ) ? And ( also ) do not follow him whose heart We have made neglectful of Our remembrance and who follows but the urge of his ( ill - commanding self ) and his case has exceeded all bounds .
And say : ( This ) Truth is from your Lord . So whoever desires may believe and whoever desires may deny . Indeed We have prepared for the wrongdoers the Fire ( of Hell ) whose walls will surround them . And if ( due to thirst and distress ) they cry , they will be helped with water like molten copper which will scald their faces . How dreadful a drink and how terrible a resting place !
Indeed those who believe and do pious deeds , We certainly do not waste his reward who does pious deeds .
For them there are ( everlasting ) Gardens with streams flowing under their ( palaces ) . They will be adorned with bracelets of gold in these Gardens , and they will wear green attires of fine brocade and heavy silk . And there they will recline upon raised and richly adorned thrones . What an excellent reward and how beautiful a resting place !
And relate to them the example of two men , one of whom We provided with two gardens of grapevines , and We hedged both from all sides with date - palms and We grew between them ( rich green ) cultivated fields .
Both these gardens yielded ( abundant ) fruits and their ( produce ) did not fall short of the mark . And We ( also ) made one stream flow in the middle of ( each of ) the two .
And this man had ( also besides this ) abundant fruits ( i . e . resources ) . While exchanging views with his companion , he said to him : I am far more affluent than you and ( also ) more honourable as regards family and tribal strength .
And ( taking him along ) he entered his garden . Doing wrong to his soul ( by way of arrogance ) , he said : I do not ( even ) imagine that this garden will perish .
Nor do I entertain the idea that the Last Hour will take place . And if ( supposedly ) I am returned to my Lord , even then I shall certainly get a place to return better than these gardens .
His companion , while exchanging views with him , said to him : Have you denied ( the Lord ) Who has created you ( first ) from clay and then from a drop of vital fluid and then accomplished you ( physically ) into a full - grown man ?
But ( this is what ) I say : Allah alone is my Lord and I do not associate any partner with my Lord .
And why did you not say when you entered your garden : Ma Sha Allah , la quwwata illa bi - llah ( It happens exactly as Allah wills . No one owns any power but with the help of Allah ) ? If ( today ) you find me inferior to you in wealth and riches ( then what ! )
It is not far from possible that my Lord may give me a garden better than yours and send from heaven some torment upon this ( garden ) turning it into a barren slippery piece of land .
Or its water may sink so deep into the earth that it gets beyond your means to fetch .
And ( because of his arrogance ) all his fruits were besieged ( with destruction ) and in the morning he was but wringing his hands with grief bewailing all that wealth which he had invested ( in raising this garden ) . And the garden had fallen down on its trellises and he ( the embodiment of despair and despondence ) said : Would that I had not attributed peers to Allah ( and had not employed self - conceit ) !
And there was ( also ) no party for him to come to his help against Allah , nor was he himself able to avenge ( this destruction ) .
( Here it becomes evident ) that all authority belongs to Allah alone ( Who ) is the Truth . He is the Best to reward and the Best to end .
And explain to them the example of the worldly life ( as well ) : it is like water that We pour from the sky . With this the vegetation of the earth grows thick , but then it becomes dry stubble which the winds blow about and Allah has Perfect Control over everything .
Wealth and children are ( mere ) adornment of the worldly life , but the things that ( actually ) endure ( are ) the good deeds ( which ) are best in the Sight of your Lord as for reward and ( also ) most valuable as regards hope .
That will be the Day ( of Resurrection ) when We shall move the mountains ( in the atmosphere , broken to dust particles , ) and you will see the earth as a clear plain ( void of plantation , stones , animals and vegetation ) . And We shall gather together the whole of mankind and shall not leave out anyone of them .
And ( all ) mankind will be presented to your Lord standing in rows . ( It will be said to them : ) Indeed you have come to Us ( Today the way ) We created you for the first time . In fact you thought that We would never appoint for you the Hour of Promise .
And the record of deeds will be placed ( before everyone ) . So , you will see the evildoers terrified at the ( sins , wrongs and offences ) registered ( in the record ) . And they will say : Oh , woe to us ! What is the matter with this record that it has left out neither any insignificant ( wrong ) nor any big ( blunder ) . It has rather taken into account ( each and every act ) . And they will find ( before them ) whatever they used to do , and your Lord will not do injustice to anyone .
And ( recall the time ) when We said to the angels : Prostrate yourselves before Adam ( in veneration ) . So they all prostrated themselves except Iblis . He ( Iblis ) was of the jinn and he walked out of the obedience to his Lord . Are you taking him and his offspring for friends leaving Me whereas in truth they are your enemies ? How evil a substitute the evildoers ( have opted in My place ) !
I called them neither ( for assistance or witness ) on the creation of the heavens and the earth , nor ( at the time of ) their own creation . Nor was it My Glory to take the inciters of misguidance as ( My ) supporters .
And ( remember ) the Day ( when ) Allah will say : Call those that you deemed to be My peers . So they will call them but they will not give them any answer , and We shall place between them ( a valley of Hell ) , the site of destruction .
And the evildoers will see the Fire of Hell and realize that certainly they are about to fall into it . And they will not be able to find any means to escape from it .
And We have indeed put forth in the Quran repeatedly for mankind every kind of example ( alternating the styles ) but man is far ahead in contention than anything else .
And nothing prevented the people from embracing faith and imploring forgiveness from their Lord , while guidance had reached them , except ( waiting for ) the pattern of the ancients ( destruction ) occurring to them or that the torment should come in front of them .
And We do not send Messengers but as Bearers of glad tidings ( to the people ) and as Warners . And the disbelievers dispute with ( these Messengers ) taking leverage of false arguments so as to eliminate the Truth with ( falsehood ) . And they scoff at My Revelations and the ( torment ) of which they are warned .
And who is a greater wrongdoer than one who was reminded of the Signs of Allah but he turned away from them and forgot those ( evil deeds ) which his hands had sent forward ? Verily We have cast veils over their hearts so that they may ( not ) understand this Truth and have plugged their ears with heaviness ( so that they may not hear this Truth ) . And if you invite them towards guidance , never ever will they take guidance .
And your Lord is Most Forgiving , Full of Mercy . If He had to take them to task for their doings , He would certainly have sent the torment upon them quickly . And in truth the Hour of Promise is ( appointed ) for them . ( When that time comes ) they will not find any place of shelter except with Him .
And these are the towns whose inhabitants We destroyed when they perpetrated oppression and injustice . And We had fixed a time for their destruction .
( And also call to mind the incident ) when Musa ( Moses ) said to his ( young companion and ) servant ( Yusha ibn Nun [ Joshua ] the son of Nun ) : I will not step ( back ) until I arrive at the junction of the two seas or I travel on infinitely .
So when both of them reached the junction of the two seas , they forgot their fish ( there ) . So , that ( fried fish came back to life and ) made its way into the sea like a tunnel and slipped off .
Then , when both of them had gone ahead , Musa ( Moses ) asked his servant : Bring us our meal . Surely we have faced great hardship during our this journey .
( The servant ) said : Did you see when we reposed beside the rock ? I forgot the fish ( there ) and none but Satan made me forget to mention it to you . And that fish ( after coming back to life ) made its way into the sea in a strange way ( and it disappeared ) .
Musa ( Moses ) said : That is the place we were looking for . So both returned to ( the same place ) , tracing the ( same track ) following their footsteps .
Then both found ( there ) one of Our ( elite ) servants ( Khidr ) upon whom We had bestowed from Our Presence ( special ) mercy and had taught him infused knowledge ( i . e . the inspired knowledge of secrets and Gnostics ) .
Musa ( Moses ) said to him : Can I stay with you under this ( condition ) that you will teach me ( as well ) some of that knowledge which has been conferred on you for guidance .
He ( i . e . Khidr ) said : No doubt , you will not be able to have patience being in my company .
And how can you observe patience in ( the matter of ) which you will not have acquired ( thorough ) knowledge ?
Musa ( Moses ) said : You will certainly find me patient , if Allah so pleases , and I will not violate any of your instructions .
( Khidr ) said : So if you are in my company then do not question me about any thing until I myself mention that to you .
So both of them set out till , when they embarked on a boat , ( Khidr ) bored a hole in it . Musa ( Moses ) said : Have you bored ( a hole in ) it to drown the people aboard ? Surely you have done something strange .
( Khidr ) said : Did I not tell you that you would not be able to restrain yourself in my company ?
Musa ( Moses ) said : Call me not to account for my omission and put me not in any more difficulty in ( this ) affair of mine .
Then both of them proceeded till they met a boy . ( Khidr ) killed him . Musa ( Moses ) said : Have you killed an innocent soul without any ( retribution due ) for anyone killed ? Indeed you have done a horrible thing .
( Khidr ) said : Did I not tell you that you would never be able to keep patience in my company ?
Musa ( Moses ) said : If I ask you about anything after this , then do not keep me with you . Indeed , in my opinion , you have reached the limit to excuse .
Then both set off , until they reached the people of a town ; both asked its residents for food but they refused to entertain them . Then they found there a wall which was about to fall . ( Khidr ) erected it . Musa ( Moses ) said : If you desired , you could take wages for this ( construction work ) .
( Khidr ) said : This is the parting ( time ) between me and you . Now I impart to you the truth of the matters about which you have not been able to keep patience .
As for the boat , that belonged to some poor people who used to toil for wages on the river . So I decided to make it defective ( because ) a ( cruel ) king was ( standing ) ahead of them , snatching every ( undamaged ) boat by force ( from the owners without any compensation ) .
And as for the boy , his parents were blessed with faith . So we feared that ( if he lived on he would become a disbeliever , and on attaining to maturity ) he would afflict both of them with disobedience and disbelief .
So we intended that their Lord might bless them with ( such ) a substitute as would be better than this ( boy ) in purity and nearer ( to his parents as well ) in clemency and kindness .
And as for the wall , that belonged to two orphan boys ( residing ) in the town . And a treasure was ( buried ) beneath it for both of them . And their father was ( a ) pious ( man ) . So your Lord willed that both of them should reach their age of maturity and dig out their treasure ( themselves ) by Mercy from your Lord . And I did not do ( whatever I did ) of my own accord . This is the truth ( of the matters ) about which you could not hold yourself .
And , ( O Most Esteemed Beloved , ) they ask you about Dhul - Qarnain . Say : I recite to you an account of him now .
( In ancient times ) We did grant him power in the land and blessed ( his regime ) with all the means and resources .
Then he took ( another ) way .
Until he reached the boundary of ( a locality towards ) the West where he perceived the setting of the sun as if going down into a spring of ( muddy black ) hot water , and he found a people ( living ) there . We said : O Dhul - Qarnain , ( it is up to you ) whether you punish them or treat them nicely .
Dhul - Qarnain said : Whoever perpetrates injustice ( by way of disbelief and mischief - mongering ) we will certainly punish him . He will then be brought back to his Lord . And then He will award him most grievous punishment .
And whoever believes and does pious acts will have better reward , and We shall ( also ) say for him in Our Commands what is lenient .
Then ( after consolidating his conquests in the West ) he set forth on ( another ) course .
Until he reached the boundary ( of a locality in the direction ) of the sunrise . There he perceived ( the rising of ) the sun ( as if ) it were rising on the people ( living in that piece of land ) for whom We had provided no cover ( for protection ) against the sun ( i . e . they lived in the caves , without clothes and houses ) .
It occurred the same way . And We have encompassed with Our knowledge whatever he had .
( Having accomplished his conquests in the East , ) he then followed ( still another ) route .
Until he reached ( a place ) between two mountains . He found a people dwelling behind these mountains . They were unable to understand ( anyones ) speech .
They said : O Dhul - Qarnain ! Gog and Magog have spread disorder in the land . Should we fix some money ( as a tribute ) for you on this ( condition ) that you raise a high wall between us and them ?
( Dhul - Qarnain ) said : The power my Lord has given me in this connection is better . Assist me with your vigour ( diligence and labour ) and I shall erect a fortified wall between you and them .
Bring me large blocks of iron . So , when he levelled ( that iron wall ) between the two ( mountain ) tops , he said : ( Now ) blow ( it after putting it on fire ) . So , when he turned that ( iron ) into a fire ( by successive blowing ) he said : ( Now ) bring me molten copper to pour on it .
Then , they ( Gog and Magog ) did not have the ability to scale it , nor could they acquire the capability to bore through it .
( Dhul - Qarnain ) said : This is Mercy from my Lord . But when my Lords promise ( of the Last Hour ) comes ( near ) , He will ( demolish this wall and ) level it with the ground ( i . e . it will be reduced to dust particles ) . And the promise of my Lord is bound to come true .
And at that time We shall release ( all the creation or Gog and Magog ) . They will run into each other ( like surging waves ) . And the trumpet will be blown . Then We shall gather them all ( in the Last Day Assembly ) .
On that Day , We shall present Hell before the disbelievers fully exposed .
Those whose eyes were veiled ( by negligence ) against My remembrance and they could not even listen ( to My remembrance ) .
Do the disbelievers think that , instead of Me , they will take My servants as helpers ? Surely , We have prepared Hell as hospitality for the disbelievers .
Say : Shall We alert you of those who are great losers in respect of deeds ?
It is those whose entire struggle is wasted in worldly life , but they presume they are doing very good works .
It is they who have denied the Signs of their Lord and meeting Him ( after death ) . So all their deeds are ruined , and We shall not give any weight or ( even ) any worth to them on the Day of Rising .
This very Hell is their reward because they kept disbelieving and mocking My Signs and My Messengers .
Surely those who believe and do good deeds persistently shall have the Gardens of Paradise as their hospitality .
They will always live there . They will never seek any change ( of abode ) from there .
Say : If the ocean turns into ink for the Words of my Lord , that ocean will exhaust before the Words of my Lord come to an end , even if We bring another similar ( ocean or ink ) to refill .
Say : I look like you only ( by virtue of my visible creation ) as a man . ( Otherwise just think what congruity you have with me . ) It is I to whom the Revelation is transmitted that your God is the One and only God . ( And just see to it whether you have any such divine potential that the Word of Allah may come down to you . ) So , whoever hopes to meet his Lord should do good deeds and must not associate any partner in the worship of his Lord .
Kaf , Ha , Ya , Ain , Sad . ( Only Allah and the Messenger know the real meaning . )
This is an account of the Mercy of your Lord ( bestowed ) upon His ( chosen ) servant Zakariyya ( Zacharias ) .
When he called upon his Lord in a low voice ( charged with politeness and submissiveness ) .
He submitted : O my Lord , my bones have grown tender and ( my ) head has turned white like a flame due to old age and , O my Lord , I have never been unblessed when supplicating You .
And I fear my ( disbelieving ) relatives ( may ruin the blessing of Din [ Religion ] ) after my ( soul departs ) and my wife ( too ) is barren . So bless me from Your Presence with an heir ( son ) .
( The one ) who should be my heir ( of divine blessing ) and also the heir of ( the chain of Prophethood from ) the Children of Yaqub ( Jacob ) . And , O my Lord , You ( also ) make him an awardee of Your Pleasure .
( Allah said : ) O Zakariyya ( Zacharias ) , indeed We give you the good news of a son whose name shall be Yahya ( John ) . We have not given this name to anyone before him .
( Zakariyya [ Zacharias ] ) submitted : My Lord , how can there be a son to me while my wife is barren , and I have shrivelled ( into extreme debility ) on account of old age ?
( He ) said : ( Dont be amazed . ) It will be the same way . Your Lord said : It is easy for Me ( to create a son ) . Certainly , I created you ( too ) before , while you were ( just ) nothing .
( Zakariyya [ Zacharias ] ) submitted : My Lord , set a Sign for me . He said : Your Sign is that despite good health you shall not be able to speak to the people for three nights ( and days ) .
Then ( Zakariyya [ Zacharias ] ) came out from his worshipping chamber to his people and conveyed to them ( i . e . made them understand ) by gestures to glorify ( Allah ) morning and evening .
O Yahya ( John ) ! Hold fast to ( Our ) Book ( the Torah ) . And We granted him wisdom and vision ( Prophethood ) while yet a child .
And ( blessed him ) with sympathy and tenderness and purity and virtuousness from Our Kind Presence and he was very Godfearing .
( He was ) greatly righteous ( and dutiful ) to his parents and was neither disobedient nor arrogant ( like common boys ) .
And peace be on Yahya ( John ) the day he was born , the day he dies and the day he will be raised up alive .
And , ( O My Esteemed Beloved , ) recite the account of Maryam ( Mary ) in the Book ( the Holy Quran ) when she separated from her family ( adopting seclusion for worship and ) moved to the eastern house .
So she adopted veiling from them ( the family and the people so that the Absolute Divine Beauty unveils Himself ) . Then We sent Our Spirit ( the angel , Jibrail - Gabriel , ) towards her who appeared before her in the complete form of a human being .
( Maryam [ Mary ] ) said : I seek refuge with the Most Gracious ( Lord ) from you if you fear ( Allah ) .
( Jibrail [ Gabriel ] ) said : I am only a messenger from your Lord . ( I have come ) to bestow upon you a pure son .
( Maryam [ Mary ] ) said : How can there be a son to me whereas no man has even touched me , nor am I unchaste ?
( Jibrail [ Gabriel ] ) said : ( Do not wonder . ) It will be the same way . Your Lord says : This ( work ) is easy for Me , and ( the objective is ) that We may make him a Sign for the people and Mercy from Us . And it is a matter ( already ) decreed .
So Maryam ( Mary ) conceived him and positioned herself at a remote site aloof ( from the people ) .
Then the birth pangs drove her to the trunk of a palm - tree . She said ( in anxiety ) : Would that I had died before this and had become totally forgotten !
Then ( Gabriel or Isa [ Jesus ] himself ) called out to her from beneath her : Grieve not . Surely your Lord has made a water spring flow under you ( or has created and laid under you a divinely eminent human being ) .
And shake the trunk of date - palm towards you . It will shed fresh ripe dates upon you .
So eat and drink and cool ( your ) eyes ( with the sight of your beautiful , lovely baby ) . Then if you see any man , say ( to him by gestures ) : I have vowed a fast ( of silence ) to the Most Gracious ( Lord ) , so I shall just not talk to any human being today .
Then , carrying ( the baby in her lap ) , she came to her people . They said : O Maryam ( Mary ) , surely you have brought quite an amazing thing !
O sister of Harun ( Aaron ) ! Neither was your father a bad man nor was your mother an unchaste woman .
On this Maryam ( Mary ) pointed to ( the baby ) . They said : How can we talk to him who is ( yet ) an infant in the cradle ?
The ( infant himself ) spoke out : I am indeed a servant of Allah . He has given me the Book and has raised me as a Prophet .
And wherever I may reside , He has made me an embodiment of blessing . And He has enjoined upon me Prayer and Zakat ( the Alms - due ) as long as I am alive .
And ( He has made me ) treat my mother with excellent morality and has not made me disobedient and ill - fated .
And peace be upon me on the day of my birth , the day of my demise and the day I shall be raised up alive .
Such is Isa son of Maryam ( Jesus son of Mary . That is ) the truth about which these people doubt .
It is not Allahs Glory that He should take ( to Himself anyone as ) a son . Holy and Glorified is He ( above this ) . When He decrees any matter , He only says to it : Be , and it becomes .
And surely Allah is my Lord and your Lord ( too ) . So always worship Him alone . This is the straight path .
Then their sects began to differ among themselves . So the disbelievers are doomed due to the presence on the Mighty Day ( of Resurrection ) .
How ( curiously ) will they hear ( with the ears wide open ) and how ( bewilderedly ) will they see ( with the eyes stunned ) on the Day when they will appear before Us ! But today the wrongdoers are but ( sunk ) into the manifest error .
And warn them of the Day of Regret ( and Shame ) when ( every ) matter shall be decided , but they are rapt in ( a state of ) negligence and simply do not believe .
Surely We alone are the inheritor of the earth and ( also ) of those who dwell on it , and ( they all ) shall be brought back to Us .
And recite the account of Ibrahim ( Abraham ) in the Book ( the Holy Quran ) . Surely he was a Prophet blessed with truthfulness .
When he said to his father ( i . e . his uncle Azar who brought him up after his father Tarukh died ) : O my father , why do you worship these ( idols ) which cannot hear or see , nor can they remove any ( troublesome ) thing from you ?
O Father ! No doubt there has come to me knowledge ( from the Divine Presence of Allah ) which has not come to you . Follow me ; I shall show you the straight path .
O Father ! Do not worship Satan . Surely Satan is a great rebel against the Most Kind ( Lord ) .
Father ! Indeed I fear that a torment from Most Kind ( Lord ) may seize you and you become a companion of Satan .
( Azar ) said : Ibrahim ( Abraham ) , have you turned away from my gods ? If you do not practically desist ( from this opposition ) I will certainly stone you to death . And keep away from me for a long while .
Ibrahim ( Abraham ) said : ( All right , ) peace be on you . I shall beg forgiveness for you from my Lord ( even ) now . He is indeed very kind to me . ( He may bestow guidance upon you . )
And I turn away from you ( all ) and these ( idols ) which you worship besides Allah . And I worship my Lord ( with absolute concentration ) . I hope that , owing to worship of my Lord , I shall not be deprived ( of His Bounty ) .
So when Ibrahim ( Abraham , giving up all social links , ) completely separated from the people and those ( idols ) that they worshipped apart from Allah , We blessed him with Ishaq ( Isaac ) and Yaqub ( Jacob , son and grandson ) and We made each of them a Prophet .
And We awarded ( all of ) them Our ( special ) Mercy and put their praise and admiration on high rhetoric ( among the believers of every divine religion ) .
And recite the account of Musa ( Moses ) in ( this Holy ) Book . Surely , ( getting rid of the grip of self , ) he had become exalted and was a Messenger and Prophet .
And We called him out from the right of ( Mount ) Tur and blessed him with Our ( special ) nearness for secret converse .
And We granted him out of Our Mercy his brother Harun ( Aaron ) , making him a Prophet ( to assist him in his task ) .
And recite the account of Ismail ( Ishmael ) in ( this ) Book . Surely he was true to ( his ) promise and was a Messenger and Prophet .
And he used to enjoin on his family Prayer and Zakat ( the Alms - due ) and ( held ) the station of Mardiyya in the Presence of his Lord ( i . e . his Lord was well pleased with him ) .
And mention in the Book the account of Idris . Verily he was a Prophet possessing the Truth .
And We raised him to a lofty station .
These are the people on whom Allah bestowed Favour from among the Prophets of the seed of Adam and of those ( believers ) whom We ( saved from Deluge and ) carried with Nuh ( Noah ) in the Ark , and of the posterity of Ibrahim ( Abraham ) and Israil ( Israel i . e . Yaqub [ Jacob ] ) and of those ( chosen ones ) whom We guided and exalted . When the Verses of the Most Kind ( Lord ) are recited to them , they fall down prostrating themselves in ( profuse ) tears .
Then followed their pathetic successors who gave up Prayers and followed lusts ( of their ill - commanding selves ) . So they will soon face punishment in the Hereafter ( in the Ghayi valley of Hell ) .
Except someone who repents and believes and persists in righteous works ; they will enter Paradise and will not be wronged in the least .
( They will dwell ) in such evergreen gardens which the Most Kind ( Lord ) has promised to His servants in the Unseen . Certainly His promise is about to come true .
They will not hear in it any absurd talk but only greetings of peace ( pouring in from every direction ) . For them , their sustenance will be ( available ) in it morning and evening .
This is the Paradise which We shall award as inheritance to those of Our servants who are God - fearing .
And , ( O Jibrail [ Gabriel ] , say to My Beloved : ) We cannot descend ( onto earth ) without the Command of your Lord . To Him belongs whatever is before us and whatever is behind us and whatever is in between . And your Lord is never forgetful ( of you ) .
( He ) is the Lord of the heavens and the earth and whatever is between the two . So worship Him and remain steadfast in His worship . Do you know who is His namesake ?
And man says : Shall I be soon brought forth alive when I die ?
Does man not remember that We had created him before this ( also ) while he was just nothing ?
So , by your Lord , We will certainly gather them and ( all ) Satans together ( on the Day of Judgment ) . We will then bring them ( all ) around Hell fallen down in kneeling position .
Then We shall indeed pick out from every group the one who had been most disobedient to and rebellious against the Most Kind ( Lord ) .
And We know best those who are most deserving of being thrown into Hell .
And there is none of you but will pass over Hell . This ( promise ) is absolutely with your Lord which will certainly be fulfilled .
Then We shall deliver the God - fearing and shall leave the wrongdoers in it ( Hell ) down on their knees .
And when Our enlightening Verses are recited to them , the disbelievers say to the believers : ( See in the selfsame world ) which of us two groups has better housing and more influential social circle .
And how many a people have We destroyed before them who were better off ( than these ) in worldly assets and pomp and show .
Say : The Most Kind ( Lord also ) grants respite in age and luxury to the one who is lost in error until , when they see what they have been promised torment or the Day of Rising then they will come to know him who is worse in respect of dwelling and ( also ) weaker in respect of troops .
Allah adds to the guidance of those who are guided aright . And in the sight of your Lord , the lasting pious deeds are better in respect of reward and ( also ) more valuable in terms of end result .
Have you seen such a person that rejected Our Signs and said : I shall certainly be given wealth and children ( the same way even on the Day of Resurrection ) ?
Is he aware of the unseen or has he taken any promise from the Most Kind ( Lord ) ?
No way ! We shall keep writing down what he says , and shall keep increasing for him torment ( upon torment ) .
And ( after his death ) We shall inherit from him what he proclaims , and he will come to Us all alone ( without wealth and children ) .
And they have taken ( many other ) gods apart from Allah so that they may be a source of honour for them .
By no means ! Soon will these ( false gods themselves ) reject their worship and become their enemies .
Have you not seen that We have sent satans upon the disbelievers ? They keep rousing them ( against Islam ) all the time .
So do not make haste against them ( for torment ) . We Ourselves keep counting days ( for their catastrophe ) .
On the Day when We shall assemble the Godfearing lot and take them ( as guests of honour ) to the Presence of the Most Kind ( Lord ) on carriages .
And We shall drive the sinners thirsty towards Hell .
( On that Day ) people will not possess the authority to intercede except those who have taken a promise ( of intercession ) from the Most Kind ( Lord ) .
And ( the disbelievers ) say : The Most Kind ( Lord ) has taken ( to Himself ) a son .
( O disbelievers ! ) You have indeed brought most horrible and unusual evil ( on your tongues ) .
The heavens may just burst at this ( fabricated lie ) and the earth split asunder and the mountains fall down to pieces .
That they have attributed a son to the Most Kind ( Lord ) .
And it is not the Glory of the Most Kind ( Lord ) to take ( someone as ) a son .
Whoever are ( dwelling ) in the heavens and the earth ( whether angels , jinn or human beings ) appear just as servants before the Most Kind Allah .
( Allah ) has surely encompassed them with His ( knowledge ) and has counted them thoroughly ( i . e . numbering them one by one ) .
And each one of them has to appear before His Presence alone on the Day of Resurrection .
Surely those who believed and did pious deeds , the Most Kind ( Lord ) will create love for them in the hearts ( of the people ) .
So We have indeed made this ( Quran ) easy in your own tongue so that , by means of it , you may communicate good news to the God - fearing and may warn thereby the contentious people .
And how many a community have We destroyed before them ! Do you perceive even a trace or hear even the faintest fizzle of anyone of them ?
Ta - Ha . ( Only Allah and the Messenger know the real meaning . )
( O My Esteemed Beloved ! ) We have not revealed the Quran to you that you land in distress .
But ( it ) is ( revealed as ) admonition for him who fears ( his Lord ) .
( This ) has been revealed by ( Allah ) Who created the earth and lofty heavens .
( He is ) Most Kind Who settled on the Throne ( of Power and Supreme Authority over all the systems of the universe befitting His Glory ) .
( So ) whatever is in the heavens ( i . e . the upper divine and celestial spheres and spatial terrestrial spheres ) and whatever is in the earth and whatever is in between the two ( i . e . the atmospheric spheres ) and whatever is beneath the soil to its bed , all are ( functioning in compliance with ) His ( command and control system ) .
And ( there is no harm ) if , in remembrance and Prayer , you raise ( louden your voice ) . He knows even the secrets ( of hearts ) and also the most hidden mysteries . ( Then how He will not hear the loud supplications ! )
Allah is ( His Self - Name ) besides Whom there is no God ( i . e . believe in Him alone and deny all other false gods ) . There are ( also ) many other Beautiful Names for Him ( that speak of His most beautiful and fascinating attributes ) .
And has the account of Musa ( Moses ) reached you ?
When Musa ( Moses ) saw a fire ( on his way back to Egypt from Madyan ) , he said to his family : Stay here . I have seen a fire ( or I have perceived a flash of love and cordiality in a fire ) . Perhaps I may bring a brand from it for you ( also ) or I find at that fire the guidance ( which I am searching for ) .
So when he reached that ( fire ) , a call was made : O Musa ( Moses ) !
Certainly I am your Lord , so take off your shoes . Verily you are in the sacred valley of Tuwa .
And I have chosen you ( for my Messengership ) , so listen to what is being revealed to you with absolute attentiveness .
Verily I am Allah . There is no God other than Me . So always worship Me and establish Prayer for the sake of My remembrance .
Certainly the Last Hour is about to come . I want to keep it secret so that every soul may be rewarded for that ( deed ) for which it is exerting .
So let not someone who ( himself ) does not believe in it and follows his own lust ( of the lower self ) prevent you from ( focusing ) it , otherwise you ( too ) will perish .
And what is this in your right hand , O Musa ( Moses ) ?
He submitted : This is my stick . I lean on it and beat down leaves with it for my goats , and in it there are also many other benefits for me .
Allah said : O Musa ( Moses ) , cast it down ( on the ground ) .
So he cast it down ( on the ground ) and suddenly it became a serpent slithering ( here and there ) .
Allah said : Catch it and do not fear . We shall transform it to its former state just now .
And ( it was commanded : ) Press your hand in your armpit . It will come out radiant white without any disease . ( This ) is another Sign .
( We are doing ) this so that We may show you greater Signs of Our ( Might ) .
Go to Pharaoh . He has exceeded limits ( in defiance and rebellion ) .
Musa ( Moses ) prayed : O my Lord , expand my breast for me .
And make my task ( as a Messenger ) easy for me .
And untie the knot from my tongue .
That people may understand ( easily ) what I say .
And appoint for me a minister from my family .
( That ) is Harun ( Aaron ) , my brother .
Provide me strength and backup with him .
And make him share my task ( of Messengership ) .
So that we ( both ) may amply glorify You .
And amply remember You .
Surely You see us well ( in the perspective of total scenario ) .
( Allah ) said : O Musa ( Moses ) , you are granted your every prayer .
And surely We graciously favoured you once ( earlier as well ) .
When We revealed to your mothers heart what was revealed
That put him ( Musa [ Moses ] ) into a box and place that ( box ) in the river . Then the river will drift it to the bank . My enemy and his enemy will pick him up . And I cast on you from My Presence a reflection of My ( Exceptional ) love ( i . e . We have made you so lovely and charismatic that whoever glance at you will be fascinated ) . And ( this was done ) so that you might be brought up before My eyes .
And when your sister , ( posing as a stranger , ) walking along , said ( to Pharaohs family ) : Shall I point out to you ( a woman ) who will nurse this ( infant ) ? Then We brought you back to your mother ( on the pretext of nursing ) so that she might cool her eyes and might not feel aggrieved as well . And you killed a man ( a disbeliever of Pharaohs people ) . Then We delivered you from ( that ) agony ( too ) and tested and assessed you through many trials . Then you stayed among the people of Madyan for many years . Musa ( Moses ) ! Then you came ( here ) at the time fixed ( by Allah . He was then exactly forty years old ) .
And ( now ) I have chosen you for Myself ( for the task of Messengership and the Exceptional Favour ) .
Go you and your brother ( Harun [ Aaron ] ) with My Signs and do not slacken in remembering Me .
Go both of you to Pharaoh ; surely he has transgressed all bounds in rebellion .
So talk to him politely . He may perhaps accept admonition or fear ( My wrath ) .
Both of them submitted : O our Lord , we fear lest he should commit some excess against us or become ( more ) rebellious .
( Allah ) said : Do not fear . I am indeed with you both . I hear and see ( all ) .
So , go you both to him and say : We are ( the Messengers ) sent by your Lord . So ( set free ) the Children of Israel ( from your slavery and ) send them with us . And do not persecute them ( anymore ) . Surely we have brought you a Sign from your Lord . And peace be upon him who follows Guidance !
Verily , it has been revealed to us that the torment will come upon ( every ) such person that rejects ( the Messenger ) and turns away from him .
( Pharaoh ) said : O Musa ( Moses ) , Who is the Lord of you both ?
Musa ( Moses ) said : Our Lord is He Who brought everything into being ( as most suitable it was ) , then guided it ( according to its potential ) .
( Pharaoh ) said : So , what was the fate of former people ( who did not believe in your Lord ) ?
( Musa [ Moses ] ) said : The knowledge about them is recorded ( and saved ) in a Book with My Lord . My Lord does not go wrong , nor does He forget .
He is the One Who made the earth habitable for you and provided therein paths for you ( to travel ) and sent down water from the sky . Then by means of that ( water ) We bring forth ( from the earth ) pairs of various kinds of vegetation .
Eat and pasture your cattle . Surely , there are Signs in it for the wise .
We created you from this ( very soil of the earth ) and We shall return you into the same and shall bring you forth from the very same once more .
And surely We showed him ( Pharaoh ) all Our Signs ( bestowed upon Musa [ Moses ] and Harun [ Aaron ] ) but he belied and refused to believe .
He said : Musa ( Moses ) , have you come to us to drive us out of our land with your magic ?
So we shall also bring to you magic resembling it . Therefore , settle an appointment between us and yourself ( for the contest ) which neither we nor you shall violate . ( The place of contest ) is to be an open and smooth ground .
( Musa [ Moses ] ) said : The day of your promise is the Eid ( Id ) Day ( the day of Annual Festival ) and that ( on that day ) all the people are to assemble there early in the forenoon .
Then Pharaoh went back ( from the meeting ) , put together his ( schemes of ) pretension and deception and then came back ( at the appointed time ) .
Musa ( Moses ) said ( to the sorcerers ) : Woe to you ! ( Beware ! ) Do not invent a lie against Allah lest He should eliminate you by torment . And surely he who fabricates a lie ( against Allah ) is a failure .
Thereupon they ( the sorcerers ) disputed among themselves about their affair and started inaudible whispering .
They said : These two are really magicians who have the intention to drive you out of your land with sorcery and put an end to your exemplary culture and religion .
( They mutually decided . ) So collect all your tricks ( of magic ) and come into the arena ( together ) in a queue and the one who prevails today will be victorious .
( The magicians ) said : O Musa ( Moses ) , either you cast ( your thing ) or we become the first ones to cast .
( Musa [ Moses ] ) said : Rather you cast down . Then the sight was that suddenly their cords and rods , by the effect of their magic , seemed to Musa ( Moses ) as if they were slithering ( on the ground ) .
Now Musa ( Moses ) felt a sort of hidden fear in his heart .
We said ( to Musa [ Moses ] ) : Do not fear . Verily , you will have the upper hand .
And cast down ( this staff ) that is in your right hand ( on the ground ) . It will swallow up that ( craft ) which they have contrived ( artificially ) . Whatever they have wrought is but a deceitful trick of a sorcerer , and wherever a magician may come , he will not be successful .
( Then things happened the same way . ) So all the sorcerers fell down in prostration ( and ) said : We embrace faith in the Lord of Harun ( Aaron ) and Musa ( Moses ) .
( Pharaoh ) said : You have embraced faith in Him before I grant you permission . Surely he ( Musa [ Moses ] ) is also your chief ( trainer ) who has taught you magic . So , ( now ) I shall certainly cut off your hands and your feet on the opposite sides and shall certainly crucify you on the palm trunks . Then you shall come to know for sure which of us is sterner in inflicting torture and lasts for a longer term .
( The magicians ) said : We shall not at all prefer you to the Clear Signs that have come to us . By that ( Lord ) Who has created us , decide whatever you want to do , for you can decide merely about ( this few days ) worldly life .
We have indeed believed in our Lord in order that He may forgive us our sins and also ( may forgive ) that sorcery to which you forced us , and Allah is the Best and Ever - Abiding .
Surely whoever comes to his Lord as an evildoer , certainly for him is Hell . ( And it is such a torment ) wherein he will neither die nor survive .
And whoever comes to His Presence as a believer ( and ) has ( also ) done good deeds , it is they for whom are high ranks .
( Those ) are evergreen gardens beneath which streams flow . ( They ) will dwell therein forever . And that is the reward for the one who purifies himself ( of the impurity and indecency of disbelief and immorality ) .
And certainly We sent revelation to Musa ( Moses ) : Move out at night taking My servants with you . So , make a dry path in the river ( by striking your staff ) . Have no fear to be overtaken ( by Pharaoh ) , nor be afraid ( of drowning ) .
Then Pharaoh chased them with his troops . So , the ( waves of the ) river swept over them as much as they covered them up .
And Pharaoh led his people astray and did not guide them to the right path .
O Children of Israel ! ( Realize ! ) Certainly We delivered you from your enemy and gave you the promise of ( coming to ) the right of ( Mount ) Tur and ( there ) We sent down to you the manna and the quails .
( And He said to you : ) Eat of the pure things that We have provided for you and do not exceed limits in that , or My wrath will become inevitable for you . And he on whom My wrath comes due is in truth destroyed .
And I am surely Most Forgiving to him who repents and affirms faith and behaves piously , then sticks to guidance ( firmly ) .
And , O Musa ( Moses ) , why did you hasten ( in coming to Tur ahead of ) your people ?
( Musa [ Moses ] ) submitted : They too are coming behind me , and I have hastened to appear before Your Presence ( possessed by love and ecstasy ) in order that You may be pleased , O my Lord !
( Allah ) said : We have indeed put your people in trial after you ( came away ) and Samiri has led them astray .
So , Musa ( Moses ) returned to his people angered and grieved ( and ) said : O my people , did your Lord not give you a fair promise ? Had a long time lapsed on you in ( the fulfilment of ) the promise ? ( Or ) did you wish that the wrath of your Lord should come due ( and befall ) you ? So you have violated ( your ) promise to me .
They said : We have not violated our promise to you of our own will , but ( what happened is that ) we were loaded with the heavy burden of the ornaments of the people , so we cast them ( into the fire ) ; then similarly Samiri ( too ) cast them away .
Then he ( Samiri ) moulded ( out of the molten ornaments ) a statue of a calf for them which produced sound like that of a cow . Then they said : This is your Lord and the Lord of Musa ( Moses too ) . So he ( Samiri ) forgot ( at this point ) .
Well , did they not see ( even this much ) that this ( calf ) could not answer them a word , nor had it any power to cause them any loss or profit ?
Earlier , Harun ( Aaron also ) had said to them , ( warning ) : O people , you have undergone a trial by virtue of this ( calf ) while your Lord is ( not this , ) but surely ( He , ) the Most Kind One . So follow me and obey my command .
They said : We shall hold fast to its ( worship ) until Musa ( Moses ) comes back to us .
Musa ( Moses ) said : Harun ( Aaron ) , when you saw them erring , what stopped you .
From following me ( and communicating to me ) ? Or who prohibited you from following my way , ( in forbidding them fiercely ) . Did you disobey me ?
( Harun [ Aaron ] ) said : O son of my mother , seize me not by my beard or my head . ( In being harsh ) I feared you would say : You have created division among the Children of Israel and have not safeguarded my word .
( Musa [ Moses ] ) said : Samiri , ( tell me , ) what is the matter with you ?
He said : I saw what these people had not seen . I took a handful ( of dust ) from the footstep of the angel ( that visited you ) ; then I cast it ( into the model of the calf ) and this way my ( lower ) self made ( it ) attractive to me .
Musa ( Moses ) said : So ( get out from here and ) go away . There is for you a lifelong ( punishment ) that you will keep saying ( to everyone ) : Touch ( me ) not , ( touch me not ) . And there is yet another promise ( of punishment ) for you which will not be averted at all . And look at this ( self - made ) god of yours to which you held fast ( in worship ) . We will surely burn it and scatter ( its dust ) well over the river .
( O my people ! He ) Allah alone is your God apart from Whom there is no god . He has encompassed everything in ( His ) knowledge .
( O Esteemed Beloved ! ) Thus We communicate to you news about the ( communities ) who have passed away , and We have surely given you from Our Exclusive Presence the Reminder ( i . e . an Admonishing Book ) .
Whoever turns away from it will certainly carry an unmanageable burden on the Day of Rising .
They will ( remain ) in this ( torment ) forever , and it will be a very evil burden for them on the Day of Rising .
The Day when the trumpet will be blown , We shall assemble the evildoers with their bodies and eyes turned blue ( due to intense fear and loss of sight ) .
Inaudibly whispering to one another : You stayed in the world for hardly ten days .
We know best what they will be saying while one of them better in wisdom and deeds will say : You have not stayed ( in the world ) for more than a day .
And they ask you concerning mountains . So say : My Lord will blow them off as dust particles .
Then will change it into a levelled , barren land .
In which you will find neither any depression nor any elevation .
On that Day people will tread on behind the caller and there will be no deviation in ( following ) him . And all voices will be hushed due to the Majesty of the Most Kind ( Lord ) . So you will not hear anything except a faint sound of a stir .
On that Day no intercession shall be fruitful except his ( intercession ) whom the Most Kind ( Lord ) has granted leave ( and permission ) and with whose word He is pleased ( such as Prophets and Messengers , Allahs chosen and fearing servants , Godwary slaves , innocent children and many other devoted servants of Allah whose intercession is validated ) .
He knows all those ( things ) which are ahead of them and which are behind them , and they cannot encompass His ( knowledge ) with ( their ) knowledge .
And ( all ) faces will bow down before the Holy Presence of the Ever - Living ( and ) Self - Subsisting ( Lord ) , and surely he who bears the burden of wrongdoing will crumble to failure .
And whoever does righteous deeds and is also blessed with faith will fear neither any injustice nor any harm .
And in this way have We sent down ( this last Revealed Book ) in the Arabic tongue ( in shape of ) the Quran and have explained in it more often than not matters inspiring fear ( of torment , in diverse ways , ) so that they may become Godfearing or this ( Quran ) may inculcate in their ( hearts a passion for the acceptance of admonition or ) the remembrance ( of the Last Day ) .
So Most High and Exalted is Allah . He alone is the True Sovereign . And do not hasten in ( reciting ) the Quran before its revelation is fully accomplished to you . And always submit ( before the Holy Presence of your Lord ) : O my Lord , increase me further in knowledge .
And truly , ( far ) earlier than this , We had given a strict command to Adam but he forgot . And We did not observe in him any intention ( to disobey ) at all ( it was just an omission ) .
And ( recall the time ) when We commanded the angels : Prostrate yourselves before Adam , they fell down in prostration except Iblis . He refused .
Then We said : O Adam , verily this ( Satan ) is an enemy to you and your wife . So let him not get you both ousted from Paradise ; then you shall be put to toil .
Surely there is this ( comfort ) for you ( in Paradise ) that you will neither feel hungry nor go naked .
And that you will neither feel thirsty here , nor will the sun prick ( you ) .
But Satan suggested to them ( an ) idea . He said : O Adam ! Shall I inform you of the tree of spending eternal life ( in the Paradise of Allahs nearness ) and also the ( secret of that divine ) dominion which will neither fall nor cease to exist ?
So ( in fondness of that station of eternal nearness to Allah ) both ate the fruit of that tree . So , their private parts became exposed to them , and both began to stick to their ( bodies ) the leaves of ( the trees in ) Paradise . And Adam made a mistake ( by way of omission ) in ( understanding ) his Lords Command . So he could not achieve the aim ( of eternal life in Paradise ) .
Then his Lord chose him ( for His nearness and Prophethood ) and turned to him ( in His Exceptional Forgiveness and Mercy ) and showed the path to the coveted destination .
( Allah ) said : Go down from here all of you . Some of you will be enemies to some others . Then if there comes to you any Guidance ( Revelation ) from Me , whoever will follow My Guidance will neither lose the straight path ( in the world ) nor face misfortune ( in the Hereafter ) .
And whoever turns away from My Direction and Guidance ( remembrance and advice ) , his worldly sustenance will be narrowed and We will raise him blind on the Day of Resurrection ( as well ) .
He will say : O my Lord , why have You raised me up blind ( today ) whereas I had vision ( in the world ) ?
( Allah ) will say : In like manner Our Signs came to you ( in the world ) but you forgot them and the same way you ( too ) will be forgotten today .
And that is how We recompense the one who exceeds the limit ( in sins ) and does not believe in the Revelations of his Lord , and surely the torment of the Last Day is extremely severe and everlasting .
Has ( this fact ) not guided them as to how many people We destroyed before them in whose dwelling places they ( now ) walk about ? Undoubtedly , in this are ( many ) Signs for the wise .
And had it not been settled already by your Lord and the time ( of the Day of Resurrection ) not fixed ( for their torment , befalling them ) the calamity ( right now ) would have been inevitable ?
So bear their ( heart - rending ) talk patiently and glorify your Lord with His praise before the rising of the sun ( in Fajr [ dawn ] Prayer ) and before its setting ( in the Asr [ afternoon ] Prayer ) and glorify Him in the early hours of night ( the Maghrib [ sunset ] and Isha [ evening ] Prayer ) and also at the ends of the day ( in Zuhr [ midday ] Prayer when the first half of the day ends and the second half starts . O Esteemed Beloved , all this is designed ) so that you may be pleased .
And do not glance with amazement and wonder at the adornments ( of worldly life ) which We have provided to some classes ( of the disbelieving materialists ) for their ( short - term ) luxury so that We may cause for them a trial in these ( very things ) . And the provision of your Lord ( in the Hereafter ) is the best and eternal .
And enjoin Prayer on your family and strictly adhere to it . And We do not ask for provision from you , ( rather ) We provide for you . And it is fearing God that brings about best results .
And ( the disbelievers ) say : Why this ( Prophet ) does not bring us any Sign from his Lord ? Has there not come to them ( the Quran , ) a Clear Proof of the things ( mentioned ) in the former Books ?
And had We destroyed them through some calamity already , they would have said : O Lord , why did You not send to us any Messenger so that we might have followed Your Revelations before we were humiliated and disgraced ?
Say : Everyone is waiting , so wait on . You will soon come to know who are the people of the right path and who are the guided ones .
The time of reckoning of people has drawn near but , rapt in heedlessness , they are disinclined ( to obedience ) .
Whenever some fresh admonition comes to them from their Lord , they listen to it ( with such carelessness ) as if they are engaged in sport .
Their hearts have become neglectful and ( these ) wrongdoers whisper ( against you ) inaudibly : He is but a human being like you . Do you ( even then ) submit to ( his ) magic while you can see ?
( The Esteemed Prophet ) said : My Lord knows ( every ) word uttered in the heavens and the earth and He is All - Hearing , All - Knowing .
But ( the wrongdoers go so far as to ) say : This ( Quran ) comprises ( things seen in ) confused dreams . Nay ! He has invented it ( himself ) . Nay , he is ( in fact ) a poet . ( If he is a true Prophet , ) let him ( also ) bring us some Sign as were former ( Prophets ) sent ( with Signs ) .
Every community whom We destroyed before them disbelieved ( these signs ) . So , will these people believe ?
And , ( O Esteemed Beloved , ) We sent only men ( as Prophets ) before you ( also ) . We used to send them Revelations . So , ( O people , ) if you do not know ( yourselves ) , ask the people of remembrance .
And We did not create them ( the Prophets ) with such bodies as would not eat food , nor were they to live ( their visible life in the world ) forever .
Then We fulfilled Our promise to them . So We delivered them and those whom We liked and We destroyed the transgressors .
Verily , We have revealed to you the Book which contains ( means and substance for ) your admonition . So do you not have sense ?
And how many communities which were unjust did We destroy and We raised up other communities after them !
Then , when they sensed Our punishment ( approaching ) , they started fleeing fast from there .
( It was said to them : ) Do not flee in haste and return to the same place where you were given comforts , and ( go back ) to your ( luxurious ) dwellings . It is likely that you are interrogated .
They said : Woe to us ! Surely , we were wrongdoers .
So this is what they always bewailed till We made them like a reaped field ( and a heap ) of extinguished fire .
And We have not created the heavens and the earth and whatever is between them ( useless ) as a sport .
If We intended to take up some sport , We would adopt it on Our own if at all We were to do ( so ) .
Nay , We strike at falsehood with the Truth with full force . So , the Truth crushes it and it ( i . e . falsehood ) gets destroyed . And you are bound to ruin yourselves owing to what you utter .
And whatever is in the heavens and in the earth ( serves and ) belongs to Him alone . And those ( angels ) who ( remain ) in His Presence are not arrogant towards His worship , nor do they become weary ( of carrying out His obedience ) .
They glorify ( Him ) night and day ceaselessly , and do not observe even a momentary pause .
Have they ( the disbelievers ) taken from ( the contents of ) the earth gods that can raise ( the dead ) alive ?
Had there been in these two ( i . e . the heaven and the earth ) other gods ( as well ) apart from Allah , then both would have been destroyed . So , Holy is Allah , the Lord of the Throne , Transcendent of all ( the things ) that these ( polytheists ) utter .
He cannot be questioned for what He does and they will be questioned ( for every action ) .
Have they ( the disbelievers ) taken gods other than Him ? Say : Bring your proof . This ( Quran ) is the reminder of those who are with me and ( also ) the reminder of those who had been before me . But most of them do not know the Truth , so they have adopted aversion to it .
And We did not send any Messenger before you but We frequented the same revelation to him : There is no God but I , so worship Me ( alone ) .
And they say : The Most Kind ( Lord ) has taken ( angels as His ) children . Holy is He . Nay , ( the angels whom they consider His children ) are but ( Allahs ) esteemed servants .
They do not precede Him in ( uttering ) any word and they remain engaged in carrying out only His Command .
He ( Allah ) knows what is before them and what is behind them , and they do not intercede ( before His Presence ) but for him with whom He is pleased . And they remain fearful of His Awe and Magnificence .
And who is it among them to say : I am a god besides ( Allah ) ? So , him We shall award Hell as punishment . This is the way We punish the wrongdoers .
And have the disbelievers not seen that the whole heavenly universe and the earth were ( all ) joined together as one unit and then We split them apart ? And We originated ( the life of ) living organism ( on earth ) from water . So do they not accept faith ( even after learning these facts brought forth by the Quran ) ?
And We set up firm mountains in the earth lest it should shake with them while rotating ( in its orbit ) . And We made in this ( earth ) broad highways so that people might find routes ( to reach different destinations ) .
And We made the heavens ( i . e . upper spheres of the earth ) a secure roof ( in order to save the inhabitants of the earth from adverse effects of fatal forces and aggressive waves shooting towards the earth from space ) and they turn away from these Signs ( of upper spheres ) .
And ( Allah ) is He Who created the night and the day , and ( also ) the sun and the moon . All ( heavenly bodies ) are continually floating fast in their respective orbits .
And We have not granted eternity to any human being before you ( in the physical life of the world ) . So , if you pass away ( from here ) will they live forever ?
Every soul has to taste death , and We make you undergo foul and fair for trial , and towards Us will you be returned .
And when the disbelievers see you , they just start mocking you ( and say : ) Is this the one who talks about your gods ( with rejection and denial ) ? And yet it is they themselves who reject the mention of the Most Kind ( Lord ) .
Man has been created ( instinctually ) from haste . I shall soon show you My Signs , so do not seek hurry .
And they say : When will this promise ( of torment ) be ( fulfilled ) if you are truthful ?
If the disbelievers knew the time when they will not be able to keep off the Fire ( of Hell ) from their faces and their backs and nor will they be helped , ( then they would not call out to hasten the torment ) .
In fact , it ( i . e . the Last Day ) will come upon them all of a sudden and stun them . So neither will they have the power to avert it , nor will they be granted respite .
And of course the Messengers were mocked before you too . Then those who ridiculed were beset by the same ( torment ) which they used to make fun of .
Say : Who can guard and save you from ( the punishment of ) the Most Kind ( Lord ) by night and by day ? In fact they keep away from the remembrance of the ( same ) Lord .
Have they any gods apart from Us who can save them ( from the torment ) ? They do not have any power even to help themselves . Nor will they get any support and alliance from Us .
Nay , We provided for them and their fathers ( generous luxuries ) so much so that their life spans also gradually prolonged . So do they not perceive that ( through Islamic conquests ) We are gradually reducing the land ( under their control ) from all borders ? So , will they dominate ( now ) ?
Say : I warn you only through Revelation . But the deaf do not hear the call whenever they are warned .
If ( even ) a minor calamity from your Lord is to really touch them , they will surely say : Woe to us . Certainly we were the unjust .
And on the Day of Resurrection We shall set up balances of fairness and justice . So no soul will be wronged in the least . And if there is ( someones deed ) equal to the weight of a mustard seed , We shall bring forth that ( as well ) . And We are Sufficient to take account .
And indeed We granted Musa ( Moses ) and Harun ( [ Aaron ] the Book , the Torah , ) the criterion distinguishing ( between right and wrong ) and ( the embodiment of ) light and admonition for the Godfearing .
( They are ) those who fear their Lord unseen and who dread ( the calamities of ) the Hour ( of Rising ) .
This ( Quran ) is the Most Blessed Admonition which We have revealed . Do you deny it ?
And surely We had awarded Ibrahim ( Abraham ) understanding and guidance ( commensurate with his rank ) well before , and We knew full well his ( competence and capability ) .
When he said to his father ( i . e . uncle ) and his people : What idols are these ( whose worship ) you are stuck to , squatting ?
They said : We found our fathers worshipping them .
Ibrahim ( Abraham ) said : Surely you and your fathers ( all ) were in manifest error .
They said : Have you ( alone ) brought the truth , or are you ( just ) one of the entertainers ?
Ibrahim ( Abraham ) said : The truth is that your Lord Who created them ( all ) is the Lord of the heavens and the earth , and I am of those who bear witness to this ( truth ) .
And I swear by Allah , I shall certainly implement a plan against your idols after you turn back and go away .
Then Ibrahim ( Abraham ) broke those ( idols ) into pieces except the biggest ( idol ) so that they might turn to it .
They said : Who has done this to our gods ? Surely he is of the wrongdoers .
( Some of the ) people said : We have heard of a young man who speaks of them ( with denial and disgust ) . He is known as Ibrahim ( Abraham ) .
They said : Bring him before the people so that they may see ( him ) .
( When Ibrahim [ Abraham ] came ) they said : O Ibrahim ( Abraham ) , is it you who have done this to our gods ?
He said : Nay , this biggest ( idol ) of them would have done this . So ask these very ( idols ) if they can speak .
Then they turned to their own ( reflections ) and said : Surely you yourselves have become the wrongdoers ( by worshipping these helpless idols incapable of doing anything ) .
Then they were turned upside down upon their heads ( i . e . their thinking reverted and they said : Ibrahim [ Abraham ] ) , surely you yourself know that they do not speak .
( Ibrahim [ Abraham ] ) said : Then do you worship apart from Allah these ( idols ) which can neither bring you any benefit nor do you any harm ?
Fie on you and ( also ) on these ( idols ) that you worship apart from Allah . Do you not then have sense ?
They said : Burn him and help your ( ruined ) gods if you have to do ( something ) .
We said : Fire , be cool and become absolute safety for Ibrahim ( Abraham ) .
And they had intended an evil plot against Ibrahim ( Abraham ) but We failed them badly .
And ( from Iraq ) We rescued Ibrahim ( Abraham ) and Lut ( Lot , his nephew , the son of his brother Haran , ) towards ( Syria ) , the land in which We have placed blessings for the people of the world .
And We blessed him with ( a son ) Ishaq ( Isaac ) and ( by his prayer a grandson ) Yaqub ( Jacob ) in addition , and We made all of them pious .
And We made them the leaders ( of mankind ) who guided ( people ) by Our Command and We sent to them Revelation ( giving commands ) to do good deeds , establish Prayer and pay Zakat ( the Alms - due ) . And All of them were Our devoted worshippers .
And We ( also ) bestowed upon Lut ( Lot ) wisdom and knowledge and We delivered him from the town whose people practised filthy deeds . They were indeed a people with extremely evil ( and ) immoral character .
And We admitted Lut ( Lot ) to the fold of Our Mercy . Truly he was of the pious .
( And recall ) Nuh ( Noah as well ) when he called ( on Us ) before these ( Prophets ) . So We granted his prayer . Then We delivered him and his family from great distress and grief .
And We helped him against ( most torturous circumstances of ) the people who rejected Our Revelations . Surely they ( too ) were a very evil people , so We drowned them all .
And ( also call to mind the account of ) Dawud ( David ) and Sulaiman ( Solomon ) when both of them were to decide ( the dispute ) of a crop when the goats of a tribe unattended by the shepherd entered the field at night ( and destroyed it ) . And We were witnessing their judgment .
So We alone taught Sulaiman ( [ Solomon ] the way to make that judgment ) and blessed them all with reason and knowledge . And We made ( even ) the mountains and the birds subservient to ( the command of ) Dawud ( David ) . They all celebrated ( Our ) Praise ( with him jointly ) . And it was We Who were doing ( all this ) .
And We taught Dawud ( David ) the art of making the coats of mail for you to protect you from injury in your battle . Are you then grateful ?
And to Sulaiman ( [ Solomon ] We subjected ) the violent wind which used to blow by his command ( from all sides and directions ) towards ( Syria ) , the land in which We have placed Blessings . And We know everything ( full ) well .
And ( We ) also made ( subservient to Sulaiman [ Solomon ] ) some of Satans ( devils and jinn ) who dived for him ( in the seas ) and besides that accomplished other services also ( under his command ) . And We alone kept watch over them ( devils ) .
And ( call to mind the account of ) Ayyub ( Job ) when he called out to his Lord : Misery has laid a hand on me , and You are the Most Merciful of all the merciful .
So We granted his prayer and We removed the misery that was afflicting him . And We ( also ) gave him back his family and ( bestowed upon him ) the like of them along with them . This is an Exceptional Mercy from Us and an Advice for those who are devoted to Our worship ( that is how Allah rewards patience and gratitude ) .
And ( also recall ) Ismail ( Ishmael ) , and Idris and Dhul - Kifl . They were all steadfast men of patience .
And We admitted them to ( the Embrace of ) Our Mercy . Surely they were of the pious .
And ( also remember ) Dhun - Nun ( the Prophet whom fish swallowed ) when he went away enraged ( at his people ) . So he thought that We would not cause him any distress ( during that journey ) . Then he cried out ( entangled ) in ( the layers of ) the darkness ( of night , under the river and in the fish belly ) : There is no God except You . Glory be to You . Surely I was of those who wrong ( their souls ) .
So We granted his prayer and We delivered him from grief . And likewise We always deliver the believers .
And ( remember ) Zakariyya ( [ Zacharias ] as well ) when he called out to his Lord : O my Lord , leave me not single and You are the Best of all inheritors .
So We granted his prayer and We blessed him with Yahya ( John ) and for his sake made his wife healthy ( fertile ) . Surely they ( all ) used to hasten in ( doing ) pious deeds and used to call on Us ( feeling ) eager , fond , fearful and frightened , and used to humble before Our Presence in tearful submissions .
( And call to mind ) that ( embodiment of purity ) Maryam ( [ Mary ] as well ) who guarded her chastity . Then We breathed into her of Our Spirit and We made her and her son ( Isa [ Jesus ] ) a Sign ( of Our Power ) for the people of the world .
Surely these ( people ) are your Umma ( [ Community ] and all ) are one Umma . And I am your Lord , so worship Me ( alone ) .
And these ( people of the Book ) split up their Din [ Religion ] into pieces among themselves . To Us they all will return .
So whoever does good deeds and is a believer as well ( the reward of ) his effort will not be refused , and surely We are writing down ( all ) his deeds .
And it is not possible that the people of the town whom We destroyed will not return to Us ( after death ) .
Until when Gog and Magog are let loose and they will come down running from every high place .
And the true promise ( of the Day of Resurrection ) will draw near , then the eyes of the disbelievers will suddenly fix staring ( and they will cry out : ) Woe to us ! We were indeed oblivious of ( the arrival of ) this ( Day ) ; in fact we were unjust .
Surely you and the ( idols ) you worship besides Allah ( all ) are the fuel of Hell . You are going to enter it .
Had they been ( true ) gods , they would not have entered Hell . And all of them will stay in it forever .
There will be their ( sighing and wailing , a ) roar of screaming in it and they will not be able to hear in it anything ( else ) .
Surely those for whom good has already been decreed from Us will be kept away from ( Hell ) .
They shall not hear even its slightest hissing sound and they shall live forever in those ( bounties ) which their hearts will long for .
( Even ) the Greatest Horror ( of the Day of Rising ) will not grieve them and the angels will welcome them , ( saying : ) This is ( but ) your Day which you were promised .
On that Day , We shall roll up the ( whole ) heavenly universe as the written papers are rolled up . The way We created ( the universe ) the first time , We shall repeat the same process of creation ( after its extinction ) . We have made it binding upon Us to fulfil this promise . We will do ( repeat it ) .
And surely We wrote in the az - Zabur ( the Psalms ) after ( stating the ) admonition that the inheritors of the earth ( in the Hereafter ) will be My pious servants .
Surely there is for the devoted worshippers a guarantee and sufficient provision in this ( Quran , of achieving the objective ) .
And , ( O Esteemed Messenger , ) We have not sent you but as a Mercy for all the worlds .
Say : This is what is revealed to me that your God is One God ( only ) . Do you then accept Islam ?
Then , if they turn away , say : I have conveyed to you all alike , and I do not know ( on my own ) whether that ( torment ) which you are promised is near or far .
He surely knows what you utter loudly and also knows ( all ) that you keep secret .
And I do not know ( on my own ) that this ( delaying of the torment and the respite given to you ) may perhaps be a trial for you and the intention may be to provide ( you ) a benefit till a fixed time .
( Our Beloved ) submitted : My Lord , judge ( between us ) with truth and Our Lord is Ever - Merciful and He is the One Whose help is sought against the ( heart - rending ) words which , ( O disbelievers , ) you utter .
O mankind ! Keep fearing your Lord . No doubt the earthquake of the Hour of Rising is a terrible thing .
The Day when you see it , every suckling woman ( i . e . mother ) will forget the ( infant ) she was suckling and every pregnant woman will abort her fetus . And , ( O observer , ) you will see people in a drunken ( state ) whereas actually they will not be drunk , but the torment of Allah will be ( so ) severe ( that everyone will lose his senses ) .
And there are some people who dispute about Allah without any knowledge and understanding and follow every disobedient Satan .
( Satan ) for whom it is written that whoever takes him for a friend , he will lead him astray and show him the road to the torment of Hell .
O people ! If you are in doubt about being raised up ( after death ) then ( contemplate your creation and evolution ) .
We initiated your creation ( i . e . chemical genesis ) from ( the extract of ) clay , then ( your biological genesis ) from a sperm drop ( zygote ) , then from a hanging mass ( clinging to the uterus like a leech embryo ) and then from a lump of flesh looking chewed , having manifest contours of elementary formation of some parts of the body and others yet to form ( fetus ) , so that We might show you ( Our Power and the trueness of Our Revelations ) .
So We cause whom We please to stay in the wombs till an appointed time . Then We bring you forth as an infant ,
then ( nourish you ) so that you may reach your youth . And of you are ( also ) some who die ( early ) and some are brought to quite a worthless age so that ( he may see this state too that ) having learnt so much knowledge , now he knows ( just ) nothing ( once more ) .
And you see the earth completely dry ( i . e . dead ) and when We shower water on it , a stir of freshness and fertility runs through it .
And it swells enriched and puts forth in pairs every kind of blooming and beauteous vegetation .
( All ) this ( keeps happening ) because Allah alone is the True ( Creator and All - Sustaining ) and doubtlessly He alone gives life to the dead and certainly He alone is All - Powerful to do everything .
And , certainly , the Last Hour is bound to come . There is no doubt about it . And verily Allah shall raise up alive those who are in the graves .
And there are some of the people who dispute about Allah ( His Essence , Attributes and Powers ) without knowledge and understanding , and without any guidance and logic , and without any enlightening Book ( sent down from heaven ) .
Turning his neck ( in arrogance ) so that he may lead ( others also ) astray from the path of Allah . For him is disgrace in the world ( too ) and on the Day of Resurrection We shall make him taste the burning torment .
This is because of the doings which your hands sent forth , and indeed Allah is not in the least unjust to His servants .
And among people there is also one who worships Allah ( keeping just ) on the verge ( of Din [ Religion ] ) . So if some ( worldly ) benefit reaches him , he feels contented with this ( Din [ Religion ] ) and if some trial befalls him , he turns about on his face away ( from Din [ Religion ] ) . He met a loss in this world ( as well as ) in the Hereafter . It is this that is conspicuously a heavy loss .
( Such a person ) worships besides Allah that ( idol ) which cannot harm him , nor can bring him benefit . That is indeed straying ( quite ) far off .
He worships someone whose loss is nearer than his profit . What an evil helper and what an evil companion !
Indeed Allah will admit those who believe and keep doing good deeds to the Gardens with streams flowing beneath them . Surely Allah does what He wills .
Whoever thinks that Allah will not at all help His ( beloved and most exalted ) Prophet in the world and in the Hereafter should tie a rope to the ceiling ( of his house ) and then hang and strangle ( himself ) . Then let him see whether his plan removes that ( help of Allah ) at which he feels enraged .
And in the same way We have revealed this ( complete Quran ) in the format of clear , logical arguments . And surely Allah blesses with guidance whom He wills .
Indeed those who believe and those who are the Jews and the Sabeans and the Christians and the Magians and those who are polytheists verily Allah will judge among ( all of ) them on the Day of Resurrection . Surely Allah is witnessing everything .
Have you not seen that to Allah bows in prostration ( the whole creation ) that is in the heavens and in the earth , and the sun , and the moon and the stars , and the mountains , and the vegetable as well as the animal kingdoms and many of mankind ( too ) ? But there are still many ( human beings ) for whom the torment has been proved ( due to their disbelief and polytheism ) . And he whom Allah dishonours none can bring him honour . Indeed Allah does what He wills .
There are two groups who dispute about their Lord . So those who have become disbelievers , the clothes of ( Hell ) Fire have been cut out ( and stitched ) for them . The boiling hot water will be poured over their heads .
With it will melt whatever is in their bellies and also ( their ) skins .
And for them will be hammers of iron ( to strike their heads ) .
Whenever they will intend to get out from there due to intense suffering , they will be turned back into it and ( it will be said to them : ) Taste the torment of fierce Fire .
Surely Allah will admit those who believe and do pious deeds to the Gardens beneath which streams flow . There they will be adorned with bracelets of gold and pearls . And their clothes there will be of silk .
And ( in the world ) they are directed to pure and decent talk and are guided to the favourite path ( of Islam ) .
Surely those who disbelieve and hinder ( others ) from the path of Allah and this Sacred Mosque ( the Kaba ) which We have made equal for all the people ( there is no discrimination ) in it between its inhabitants and the visitors and he who resolves in it to deviate unjustly ( transgress the appointed limits and violate rights ) , We shall make him taste grievous torment .
And ( recall the time ) when We fixed for Ibrahim ( Abraham ) the site of the House of Allah ( for the construction of the Kaba and ordained him : ) Do not associate with Me anything and keep My House ( after its construction ) purified and clean for those who circumambulate it and those who stand and those who kneel and prostrate themselves in Prayer .
And proclaim Hajj ( Pilgrimage ) aloud among the people . They will approach you on foot and ( mounted ) on all lean camels , coming by distant tracks
So that they may avail themselves of their benefits and invoke the Name of Allah as well ( while slaughtering ) over the cattle which Allah has provided for them ( for sacrifice ) , during the appointed days . Then eat of them yourselves and feed the distressed and the needy .
Then let them cleanse their dirt ( i . e . cut their hair and nails on removing Ihram , the Pilgrim attire ) , fulfil their vows ( or the remaining prescribed rituals of Pilgrimage ) and make ( the prescribed farewell ) circumambulation of Allahs Ancient House ( the Kaba ) .
That is ( the Command ) . And whoever venerates the things sanctified before ( the Presence of ) Allah that is better for him in the sight of his Lord . ( All ) the cattle ( i . e . quadrupeds ) are made lawful for you except those whose prohibition has been recited to you . So always keep away from the filth of idols and guard yourselves against telling lies .
Devote yourselves wholly to Allah alone , not associating ( anything as ) partner with Him . And whoever associates anything as partner with Allah , ( his case is as if ) he fell from the sky , then birds snatched him up or the wind blew him away down into a distant place .
That is the ( Command ) . And whoever venerates the Signs of Allah ( i . e . honouring those living beings , shrines , monumental sites , commands and prescribed duties known and recognized due to some pious association or link with Allah or Allahs devoted servants ) , this ( veneration ) is of the Godwariness of hearts ( only those venerate whose hearts have been blessed with fear of God ) .
There are benefits for you in these ( sacrificial animals ) for a fixed term . Then they are to arrive at the Ancient House ( the Kaba for sacrifice ) .
And We have appointed a sacrifice for every people so that ( at the time of sacrifice ) they may invoke the Name of Allah over the cattle ( i . e . quadrupeds ) that Allah has provided for them . And your God is ( only ) One God , so submit to Him alone , and , ( O Beloved , ) give good news to those who remain submissive .
( They are ) the people whose hearts get into fear when Allah is mentioned and they bear with fortitude whatever troubles touch them . And they establish Prayer and give away out of what We have bestowed upon them .
And We have made for you bigger sacrificial animals ( i . e . camels and cows , etc . ) from among the Signs of Allah . There is good in them for you . So line ( them ) up and ( after lancing at the time of their slaughter ) invoke the Name of Allah over them . Then , when they fall down on their sides , eat of it ( too ) and feed those who are sitting contented as well as the ( needy ) who beg . We have this way subjected them to you so that you may give thanks .
It is neither the meat ( of slaughtered animals ) nor their blood that reaches Allah at all but it is the Godwariness that reaches Him from you . Thus has Allah subjected them to you so that you may proclaim Allahs greatness ( while sacrificing ) the way He has guided you . And give glad tidings to those who practise spiritual excellence .
Surely , Allah removes from the men of faith ( the mischief and strife of their enemies ) . Indeed He does not like anyone treacherous ( and ) ungrateful .
Permission ( to fight against mischief , disruption and oppression ) is granted to those against whom ( unjust ) war is waged , because they were oppressed and Allah is doubtlessly All - Powerful to help them ( the oppressed ) .
They are those who were unjustly expelled from their homes simply because they said : Our Lord is Allah . ( i . e . they refused to accept the evil rule ) . And had Allah not been repelling one class of human society by the other ( through progressive struggle and revolutionary toil ) , the cloisters , synagogues , churches and mosques ( i . e . religious centres and worship places of all religions ) would have been ruined where Allahs Name is abundantly commemorated . And whoever helps ( Din [ Religion ] of ) Allah , Allah surely helps him . Allah is indeed All - Powerfull , Ever - Dominant ( over all i . e . the survival of good is possible only through the revolutionary process of contradiction and conflict between good and evil ) .
( These men of Truth ) are those who , if We establish their rule in the earth , will establish ( systems of ) Prayer , ( organize and control ) paying of Zakat ( the Alms - due ) , enjoin righteousness ( and piousness in the whole society ) and forbid ( people from ) evil . And the result of all the endeavours is in the control of Allah .
And if these ( disbelievers ) reject you then the people of Nuh ( Noah ) and Ad and Thamud ( also ) denied ( their Prophets ) .
And the people of Ibrahim ( Abraham ) and ( also ) the people of Lut ( Lot ) .
And the inhabitants of Madyan ( too belied ) . And Musa ( Moses ) was also rejected . So I kept giving respite to ( all ) the disbelievers . Ultimately I seized them . ( Say , ) how terrible was My punishment !
Then how many a town was there which We annihilated because they were oppressors ! They are fallen down on their roofs . And ( owing to their devastation ) how many a well ( was ) deserted and how many a strongly built castle ( is ) lying ruined !
Have they not travelled in the land that ( perhaps by seeing these ruins ) their hearts should become ( such ) as to understand or the ears ( such ) as to hear ( the Truth ) ? So the fact is that it is not the eyes ( of such people ) that are blind , but the hearts turn blind which are in the breasts .
And they seek from you torment in haste and Allah never goes against His promise . And ( when the Hour of torment will come ) then one day ( of torment ) with your Lord is like a thousand years , according to your ( scale of ) counting .
And how many a town I gave respite while it was given to wrongdoing and then I seized it ( with torment ) ! And to Me has ( everyone ) to return .
Say : O people , I am only a Warner to you ( against the torment of Allah ) .
So they who believe and do good deeds , for them is forgiveness and bounty of ( greater ) honour and dignity .
And those who strive in ( refuting ) Our Verses with the idea to frustrate ( Us ) , it is they who are the inmates of Hell .
And We did not send any Messenger and Prophet before you but ( it happened to them all ) that when he ( the Prophet or the Messenger ) would recite ( to the people the Revelations of Allah ) , Satan mixed up in their minds false doubts and absurd ideas of his own with the Verses recited ( by that Prophet ) . Then Allah removes those doubts from the minds of the people which Satan puts ( into the minds of the listeners ) . And then Allah firmly establishes His Verses ( in the hearts of the believers ) . And Allah is All - Knowing , All - Wise .
( It happens ) so that Allah may make these ( false ideas and absurd doubts ) which Satan puts ( into their minds ) a trial for those people whose hearts are diseased ( of hypocrisy ) and whose hearts are hardened ( owing to disbelief and disgust ) . And surely the wrongdoers are engaged in serious rivalry .
And so that those who have been given ( true ) knowledge may know that the ( Revelation which the Messenger recited ) is ( based on ) the truth from your Lord , so , they believe in the same ( and reject Satans suggestions ) and their hearts beat in submissiveness ( before the Lord ) . No doubt , Allah does guide the believers to the straight path .
And the disbelievers will always remain in doubt about this ( Holy Quran ) until the Last Hour comes suddenly upon them or the torment of the Day from which salvation is least possible .
On that Day sovereignty will be Allahs alone . He is the One Who will judge among them . So those who believe and do good deeds , will ( reside ) in the Gardens of Bliss .
And those who disbelieve and reject Our Revelations , for them will be humiliating punishment .
And those who migrated from their ( homeland ) in the way of Allah ( and ) were then slain or died ( suffering from troubles in the way of Allah ) , Allah shall indeed provide for them an excellent provision ( of bestowals specific to the Last Day ) . And verily Allah is the Best of providers .
He will indeed admit them to that ( station of divine pleasure ) they will be well pleased with . And Allah is indeed All - Knowing , Most Forbearing .
That is ( the Command ) . And whoever takes revenge in proportion to the torture inflicted upon him and then he is again wronged , Allah will surely help him . Allah is verily Most Forgiving , Most Pardoning .
That is because Allah causes the night to enter into the day and causes the day to enter into the night , and indeed Allah is All - Hearing , All - Seeing .
And that is because Allah alone is the Truth , and whatever they ( i . e . the disbelievers ) worship besides Him is certainly falsehood and verily Allah is Most High , Most Great .
Have you not seen that Allah sends down water from the sky and the earth becomes fresh and green ? Allah is indeed Most Beneficent ( and ) All - Aware .
To Him belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth . And surely Allah is Self - Sufficient , All - Praiseworthy .
Have you not seen that Allah has subjected to you whatever is in the earth and ( also ) the vessels that sail in the sea ( and river ) by His Command ( i . e . Law ) and He withholds the heavens ( spatial spheres and atmospheric fields ) from falling on to the earth ( under a cosmic system ) ? But ( when He wills , they will collide ) by His Command . Surely Allah is Most Compassionate , Most Merciful to mankind .
And He is the One Who gave you life , then He causes you to die and then will give you life again . No doubt , it is the man who is highly ungrateful .
We have appointed for every people a way ( of Islamic injunctions or worship and sacrifice ) which they are to act upon . So let them not at all dispute with you over the Command ( of Allah ) . And keep calling towards your Lord . Certainly it is you who are on the straight ( path of ) guidance .
And if they dispute with you then say : Allah knows best whatever you are doing .
Allah will judge between you on the Day of Judgment all those matters in which you used to disagree .
Do you not know that Allah knows all that is in the heavens and the earth ? Verily it is all ( recorded ) in the Book ( al - Lawh al - Mahfuz ) . Surely all that is ( very ) easy for Allah .
And they worship these ( idols ) besides Allah for which He has not sent down any authority . Nor do they have any knowledge of ( the consequence of ) this ( idol - worship ) . And there will be no helper of the wrongdoers ( on the Day of Judgment ) .
And when Our enlightening Verses are recited to the disbelievers , you can clearly see ( signs of ) displeasure ( and resentment ) on their faces . It seems as if they are nearly ready for violent attack on those who are reciting to them Our Signs . Say : ( O restlessly upset disbelievers , ) shall I inform you of something more agonizing than this ? ( That ) is the Fire ( of Hell ) which Allah has promised to the disbelievers . And that is the most evil abode .
O mankind ! An example is given , so listen to it attentively . Verily the ( idols ) you worship besides Allah cannot create ( even ) a fly though they all may join in for this ( purpose ) . And if the fly snatches a thing away from them , they cannot ( even ) recover it from that ( fly ) . How helpless is the seeker ( worshipper ) and the sought ( god ) !
These ( disbelievers ) did not recognize the value of Allah as was His due . Surely , Allah is Most Powerful , Most Dominant ( over everything ) .
Allah chooses His Messengers from among angels and from among men ( as well ) . Surely , Allah is All - Hearing , All - Seeing .
He knows ( best ) what is before them and what is behind them . And to Allah are returned all matters .
O Believers ! Persist in kneeling down and prostrating yourselves and worshipping your Lord , and do ( other ) pious deeds consistently so that you may prosper .
And toil hard ( for the establishment and promotion of Allahs Din [ Religion ] , fully charged with His love and obedience , ) as is toil His due . He has chosen you and has not laid upon you any hardship or constriction ( in the matter of ) Din ( Religion ) . This is the Din ( Religion ) of your father Ibrahim ( Abraham ) . He ( Allah ) has named you Muslims in the previous ( Books ) as well as in this ( Holy Quran ) so that this ( Last of the ) Messengers may be a witness over you and you be witnesses over mankind . So , ( to sustain this status ) establish Prayer , pay Zakat ( the Alms - due ) and hold fast to ( the Embrace of ) Allah . He ( alone ) is your Helper ( Patron ) . So what an excellent Patron and what an excellent Helper is He !
Certainly the believers have attained their goal .
Those who become most humble and submissive in their Prayer .
And who ( always ) keep away from absurd talk .
And who ( always ) pay Zakat ( the Alms - due [ and keep purifying their wealth and souls ] ) .
And who guard their private parts ( all the time ) .
Except from their wives or those slave - girls who are the possessions of their hands . ( If they go to them according to the Islamic injunctions ) , there is surely no blame on them .
But whoever desires someone beyond these ( lawful women ) , it is these people who are transgressors ( and disobedient ) .
And those who are watchful of their trusts and their pledges .
And who guard their Prayers ( with persistence ) .
It is they who will be the inheritors ( of Paradise ) .
They will inherit ( also ) the most superior Gardens of Paradise ( where all the bounties , comforts and pleasures of nearness to Allah will abound ) . They will live there forever .
And indeed We originated ( the genesis of ) man from the extract of ( chemical ingredients of ) clay .
Then We placed him as a sperm drop ( zygote ) in a secure place ( mothers womb ) .
Then We made that zygote a hanging mass ( clinging to the uterus like a leech ) . Then We developed that hanging mass into a lump , looking chewed with teeth . Out of this chewed lump We built a structure of bones which We clothed with flesh ( and muscles ) . Then ( changing him ) into another form We developed him ( gradually ) into a new creation . Then Allah brought ( him up into a strong body ) , Allah the Best of creators .
Then certainly after this ( life ) you shall die .
Then indeed on the Day of Resurrection you will be raised up ( after brought to life ) .
And surely We have created above you seven paths ( i . e . seven magnetic paths or fields , around the vast atmospheric expanse of the planet earth , for the safeguard of the cosmic system ) . And We were not unaware of the creation ( of the universe and the pre - requisites of its security ) .
And We showered water persistently ( for a long time ) from the clouds according to an estimated measure . So ( when the earth became cool then ) We lodged this water in ( the depressions and depths of ) the earth ( shaping into preliminary forms of oceans ) . And verily We have the power to make it evaporate ( as vapours ) .
Then by means of this We caused to grow for you ( step by step firstly herbs , then plants and then trees and ) the gardens of dates and grapes . ( Furthermore , We created ) for you many ( other ) fruits of which you eat ( now ) .
And ( We have also created for you the olive ) tree which grows forth from the Mount Sinai , ( and ) contains oil , and is a curry for those who eat .
And for you indeed there are ( also ) aspects to the cattle that need contemplation : We make you drink ( milk We prepare from some ingredients ) of what is in their bellies . And there are for you ( also ) many ( other ) benefits in them , and you eat ( some ) of them ( as well ) .
And you are ( also ) borne upon them and on boats .
And surely We sent Nuh ( Noah ) to his people . He said : O people , always worship Allah . There is no God for you other than He . So do you not fear ?
Then the chiefs ( and the lords ) of his people who disbelieved said : This man is just a human being like you , ( nothing else ) . He seeks to establish ( his ) superiority and predominance over you . And if Allah wanted ( to send some Messenger for guidance ) , He would send down angels . We have never heard of it from our ancestors ( that a human being like us should be appointed as our Messenger ) .
He is nothing but a man ( afflicted ) with madness . So wait for him for a while ( and keep an eye on what he does next ) .
Nuh ( Noah ) submitted : O my Lord , help me because they have rejected me .
Then We revealed to him : Build an Ark under Our supervision according to Our Command . So when Our Command ( for torment ) comes and the ( water - filled ) oven starts overflowing , load into it of every kind of animals two pairs each ( male and female ) and also your family except that one among them about whom the Command ( of torment ) has already been issued . And also do not supplicate Me concerning those who have wronged ( by denying and mocking you ) . They shall ( surely ) be drowned .
So when you and the ( people ) accompanying you get settled in the Ark then say : All praise be to Allah alone , Who has delivered us from the unjust people .
And submit : O my Lord , land me at a blessed destination , and You are the Best of all Who bring to land .
Surely in this ( event ) there are ( many ) Signs and We do certainly make trials .
Then We raised after them another community .
So We sent among them ( also ) a Messenger from among themselves : Worship Allah . There is no God for you other than He . So do you not fear ?
And proclaimed the chiefs ( and the lords ) of his people ( too ) who disbelieved and rejected the meeting of the Hereafter and whom We had ( also ) given prosperity ( on account of riches and abundant wealth ) in worldly life ( they said to the people ) : He is only a human being like you . He eats what you eat and drinks what you drink .
And if you obey a human being like yourselves , then you shall be the sure losers .
Does he promise you that , when you die and become dust and ( decomposed ) bones , then you will be brought forth ( alive again ) ?
Far ( from understanding ) , far ( off from likelihood ) are the things you are being promised .
There is nothing ( like life after death ) . Our life is only this world . We live and die ( here alone ) and ( that is all ) . We shall not be raised up ( again ) .
He is merely a man who has put a false blame on Allah , and we are not going to believe in him at all .
( The Prophet ) submitted : O my Lord , help me in the circumstances that they have rejected me .
( Allah ) said : They will repent in a little while .
So , according to the true promise , the dreadful Blast seized them and We made them a waste of withered grass . Far distant from and deprived ( of Our Mercy ) are the unjust and wrongdoing people .
Later We raised after them other communities ( one after the other ) .
No community can step ahead of their appointed time , nor can they step back .
Then We sent Our Messengers one after the other . Whenever there came to a community their Messenger , they rejected him . Then We also destroyed them one after another ( by successive torments ) and We reduced them to mere tales . So woe to the people who do not believe !
Then We sent Musa ( Moses ) and his brother Harun ( Aaron ) with Our Signs and an evident authority .
To Pharaoh and the chiefs ( of his people ) . They too behaved with arrogance and conceit . And they too were ( extremely ) wrongdoing and disobedient people .
So they ( also ) said ( the same ) : Shall we believe in two human beings like ourselves while their people worship us ?
They ( also ) belied both of them . So they too became of those who were eliminated .
And indeed We gave Musa ( Moses ) the Book so that they might take guidance .
And We made Isa ( Jesus ) son of Maryam ( Mary ) and his mother Our ( Great ) Sign . And We provided them a comfortable and facilitated living place on a pleasant , elevated ground fit for living with ease and comfort , and there was flowing water ( i . e . streams , waterfalls and springs a feast ) for sight .
O ( My Esteemed ) Messengers ! Eat of the pure things ( as your practice is ) and do good deeds with persistence . Surely I am Well Aware of whatever ( deed ) you do .
And surely this is your Umma ( [ Community ] which is in fact ) but one Umma ( Community ) and I am your Lord . Therefore , always fear Me .
But they broke the command of their Din [ Religion ] into sects by disagreeing among themselves . Each sect is glad with that much ( portion of Din [ Religion ] ) which they have .
So leave them ditched in their ignorance and error for a time .
Do they think that the help We are giving them ( in this world ) in the shape of wealth and children .
( Implies that ) We are hastening ( the provision of ) good things to them ? ( No way ! ) The truth is that they have no awareness .
Indeed those who remain restless and tremble with fear of their Lord .
And those who believe in the Revelations of their Lord .
And those who do not associate ( any ) partners with their Lord .
And those who give away ( in the way of Allah as much ) as they can , yet ( in spite of that ) their hearts fear that they are to return to their Lord ( lest it should be rejected ) .
It is these people who are hastening in ( collecting ) good works and it is they who excel in this pursuit .
And We do not strain any soul but commensurate with its capacity , and with Us is the record ( of deeds ) which will speak the truth , and they will not be wronged .
But their hearts are in ( utter ) negligence of this ( message of the Quran ) and ( also ) besides that there are many other ( evil ) deeds which they are doing .
Until when We seize the rich and the prosperous of them with torment , then they will cry out .
( It will be said to them : ) Do not cry today . Surely you shall not be helped by Us .
Certainly , My Verses were repeatedly recited to you but you used to turn back on your heels .
Displaying haughtiness and arrogance against it , you used to utter absurdity in the darkness of night .
So have they not pondered over this Command ( of Allah ) ? Or has there come to them such a thing that did not come to their fathers ?
Or have they not recognized their Messenger and ( so ) they deny him ?
Or do they say : He ( the Prophet ) is ( afflicted ) with mania ? ( Nay , not at all ; ) he has rather brought to them the Truth but most of them do not like the Truth .
And had the ( Holy ) Truth ( Allah ) followed their vain desires then ( all ) the heavens and the earth and whatever ( living and non - living things ) are therein , all would have been destroyed . We have rather brought them that ( Quran ) which contains ( the secret of ) their honour , dignity ( and fame ) . So it is from their own honour that they are turning away .
Do you demand of them any recompense ( for preaching the faith in Messengership ? Nay , that too is not the case . ) The recompense of your Lord itself is ( by far ) the best and He is the Best of all sustainers .
And surely you call them to the straight path ( for their own good ) .
And surely those who do not believe in the Hereafter remain deviated from the ( straight ) path .
And if We have mercy on them and remove the distress that has ( afflicted ) them , they will become hardened in their transgression wandering disorientated .
And indeed We seized them with torment , but ( still ) they did not adopt submissiveness to their Lord , nor did they entreat in humility ( before His Presence ) .
Until when We open to them the gate of an extremely harsh torment , ( then , ) at that time , taken aback , they will ( stay ) therein stunned in despair .
And He is the One Who ( gradually ) made for you ears and eyes and hearts ( and minds ) but you give very little thanks .
And He is the One Who created and then scattered you in the earth and before Him will you be gathered .
And He is the One Who gives life and causes death and in His control is ( also ) the alternation of night and day . So do you not understand ?
But these people ( too ) utter similar words that the former ( disbelievers ) used to utter .
They say : When we die and turn into dust and ( decomposed ) bones , then shall we be raised up ( after given life again ) ?
Surely this is what we and our fathers have ( also ) been promised . These ( sayings ) are but the tales of the bygone people .
Say ( to them ) : To whom belongs the earth and everyone ( living ) in it , if you know ( anything ) ?
They will promptly say : ( All ) belongs to Allah . ( Then ) say : Then why do you not accept guidance ?
Ask ( them ) : Who is the Lord of the seven heavens and the Mighty Throne ( i . e . the Sovereign Authority of the entire universe ) ?
They will spontaneously say : ( All ) this belongs to Allah . Say : Why do you not fear then ?
Say ( to them ) : Who is He in Whose Mighty Hand is the Absolute Ownership of everything and Who gives asylum but against Whom no asylum can be given , if you know ( anything ) ?
They will readily say : That is all Allahs ( Glory ) . So , say : From where then are you being deceived ( as if under a spell ) ?
The fact is that We have brought them the Truth and they are liars without any doubt .
Allah has not taken ( to Himself ) any son , nor is there any god with Him . In that case each god would certainly have taken ( away ) what he had created and they would surely have dominated each other ( and the whole universe would have undergone violence and chaos ) . Glorified is Allah , above all that they describe .
( He ) is the Knower of ( all things ) hidden and disclosed . So He is Exalted , High above all what they associate with Him .
( Pray : ) O my Lord , if You would show me that ( torment ) which they are being promised .
( Then , ) my Lord , put me not among the unjust people .
And We certainly have the Power to show you that ( torment ) of which We are making them a promise .
Repel evil in such a way as is best of all . We know best ( the things ) they say .
And say , ( praying ) : O my Lord , I seek Your shelter from promptings of satans .
And , O my Lord , also I seek refuge with You lest they should come to me .
Until when death comes to anyone of them , ( then ) he will say : O my Lord , send me back ( to the world ) .
So that I may do some righteous works in that ( world ) which I have left behind . No way ! He will be saying this ( only in despair ) . And ahead of them is a barrier ( erected ) till the Day ( when ) they will be raised up ( from the graves ) .
Then when the trumpet will be blown neither any relation will remain ( intact ) among them that Day , nor they will be able to ask of one another .
So they whose scales will weigh heavy ( due to greater number of good deeds ) will be successful and prosperous .
And the ones whose scales will be light ( due to little weight of good deeds ) it is they who have harmed themselves . They are permanent residents of Hell .
The Fire will burn their faces and they will be lying in it with teeth bulging out and mouths deformed .
( It will be said to them : ) Were My Revelations not repeatedly recited to you , and then you used to belie them ?
They will say : O our Lord , our misfortune overwhelmed us , and surely we were the misguided people .
O our Lord ! Take us out from here . Then if we repeat ( the same error ) we shall certainly be the wrongdoers .
( Allah will ) say : Stay on therein with disgrace and do not speak to Me .
Indeed there was a party of My servants who used to submit ( before My Presence ) : O our Lord , we have believed , so forgive us and have Mercy on us . And ( surely ) You are the Best of the merciful .
But you used to laugh at them till they made you forget My remembrance and you ( just ) continued making fun of them .
This Day I have bestowed upon them ( this ) reward for their patience that they have triumphed .
( Allah ) will say : How many years have you stayed in the earth ?
They will say : We might have stayed there a day or part of a day , but ask those who work out statistics .
( Allah ) will say : You stayed there but very little . Would that you knew ( it there ) !
So did you think that We had created you in vain ( without any purpose ) and that you would not return to Us ?
So Allah the True Sovereign is High and Exalted . There is no God but He . He alone is the Lord of the Venerated Throne ( Authority ) .
And anyone who worships another god along with Allah has no proof of this . So he will be accountable for that to his Lord alone . Surely , the disbelievers will not be successful .
And submit : O my Lord , forgive and have Mercy and You ( alone ) are the Best of those who have mercy .
This is a ( great ) Sura which We have revealed and We have made its ( Commandments ) obligatory . And We have sent down in it clear Revelations so that you may take direction and guidance .
Whip a hundred lashes each , the ( unmarried ) adulteress and the adulterer ( on validation of adultery in accordance with conditions of statutory [ hadd ] punishment . If married , then both are to be stoned to death ) . And you should not feel even the slightest pity for both of them ( in executing the command of Din [ Religion ] ) if you have faith in Allah and the Last Day . And a ( sizeable ) party of Muslims should be present on ( the occasion of ) award of punishment to both of them .
An adulterer does not ( like to ) marry ( a chaste and virtuous woman ) but only an adulteress or a polytheist , and no ( pious man likes to ) marry an adulteress ( too ) but only an adulterer or a polytheist . And this act ( adultery ) has been forbidden to the Muslims .
And those who accuse chaste women ( of adultery ) , then fail to produce four witnesses , whip them eighty lashes ( as qadhaf punishment for false accusation ) and never accept their evidence . And it is they who are the evildoers .
Except for those who repent after this ( false blaming ) and mend their ways . Then Allah is verily Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful . ( They will not be counted among the disobedient , but this will not exempt them from hadd al - qadhaf [ the penalty for false accusation ] . )
And those who accuse their wives ( of adultery ) and have no witnesses except themselves , the testimony of such a person would be to swear ( himself ) four times by Allah that he is truthful ( in his accusation ) .
And the fifth time ( to say ) that Allahs curse be upon him if he is a liar .
And ( similarly ) this can avert punishment from that ( woman as well ) if she ( herself ) gives evidence , swearing four times by Allah that he ( the husband ) is a liar ( in accusing her ) .
And the fifth time ( to say ) that Allahs wrath be upon her ( i . e . me ) if he ( the husband ) is truthful .
And had there not been Allahs Grace and Mercy upon you ( then you would have been more perturbed under such circumstances ) and Allah is surely Most Relenting , All - Wise .
Surely those who fabricated the accusation ( against Aisha the truthful , the pure , the chaste may Allah be well pleased with her ) were ( also ) a party from among you . Do not consider this ( slander account ) as a bad thing for you . It has rather ( turned out to be ) good for you . Everyone of them has a share in the sin as much as he has earned it , but whoever has had major share in this ( false accusation ) , for him is a terrible torment .
Why did it not happen that when you heard of it ( the slander ) the believers , both men and women , would think good of their own people and say : This is obviously a fabricated accusation ( based on falsehood ) ?
Why did these ( slanderers ) not produce four witnesses to this ( turmoil ) ? Since they could not bring forth witnesses , it is certainly they who are liars in the sight of Allah .
And had there not been Allahs Grace upon you and His Mercy in this world and in the Hereafter , severe torment would have afflicted you for promoting that ( slander ) into which you rushed headlong .
When ( hearing this matter from one another ) you brought it on your tongues and uttered with your mouths something about which you ( yourselves ) had no knowledge , and you took ( propagation of ) this matter as inconsiderable , whereas in the Presence of Allah it was a grave ( offence underway ) .
And when you heard of this ( heinous charge ) , why did you not declare ( at the same moment ) : It is not ( at all justified ) for us to talk about it ? ( Rather you should have said : O Allah , ) Holy are You ( High above making such a woman the beloved wife of Your beloved and Esteemed Messenger ) . This is a grave charge .
Allah admonishes you never ever to repeat such a thing ( in your lifetime ) , if you are believers .
And Allah explains to you the Revelations with utmost clarity . And Allah is All - Knowing , All - Wise .
Indeed those who like that lewdness should spread among the Muslims , for them is agonizing punishment in this world and in the Hereafter . And Allah knows ( the intentions of such people ) and you do not know .
And had there not been Allahs Grace and His Mercy upon you ( for the sake of the Holy Prophet , you too would have been destroyed like the former communities ) . But Allah is Most Clement , Ever - Merciful .
O Believers ! Do not follow the footsteps of Satan , and whoever follows the footsteps of Satan , then he ( Satan ) certainly commands to practise ( and promote ) immorality and sinful deeds . And if there had not been Allahs Grace and His Mercy upon you then none of you would ever have been pure ( from the stain of the sin of slander ) . But Allah purifies whom He wills and Allah is All - Hearing , All - Knowing .
And ( now ) those of you who are exalted ( Din Religionwise ) and affluent ( worldwise ) must not swear that they will not provide ( financial help ) to the relatives , the needy and the emigrants ( who were involved in this offence of false accusation ) . They should forgive ( their misconduct ) and overlook ( their mistake ) . Do you not like that Allah should forgive you ? And Allah is Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
Verily those who falsely accuse chaste believing women who are unaware of and unacquainted ( with even the very idea of indecency and evil ) are cursed in this world and in the Hereafter . And for them is woeful punishment .
On the Day when their ( own ) tongues and their hands and their feet will bear witness against them for whatever they used to do .
On that Day Allah will pay them full recompense that they truly deserve ( for their deeds ) . And they will come to know that Allah is ( Himself ) the Truth ( and also ) the Revealer ( of the Truth ) .
Unclean women are ( particular ) for unclean men while unclean men are meant for unclean women . And ( likewise ) clean and chaste women are ( specific ) to clean and pious men while clean and pious men are exclusively for clean and chaste women . ( So keeping in view the holiness , sanctity and purity of the Holy Prophet , you yourselves could imagine how pure , wholesome and chaste a wife Allah would have raised for him . ) These ( pure , innocent and divine people ) are totally free from these ( slanders ) which these ( foul - mouthed ) people are levelling . Forgiveness and bestowal of honour and dignity have been ( destined ) for them . ( Why do you ruin your life after death and earn disgrace and humiliation by denigrating his glory ? )
O Believers ! Do not enter houses other than your own until you obtain their permission . And greet their residents ( immediately after you enter ) . This ( advice ) is better for you so that you may contemplate ( its rationale ) .
Then , if you do not find anyone in these ( houses ) , do not enter them until you are granted permission ( for that ) . And if it is said to you : Go back , then do go back . That is purer for you , and Allah is Well Aware of what you do .
There is no sin on you if you enter ( without permission ) those houses ( or buildings ) which are not any permanent residences ( such as hotels , roadhouses and inns ) . You have the right to get benefit therein . And Allah knows ( all ) that you disclose and that you conceal .
Direct the believing men to keep their eyes always lowered and guard their private parts . That is purer for them . Surely Allah is Well Aware of the ( works ) which they are busy doing .
And direct the believing women that they ( too ) must keep their eyes lowered and guard their chastity , and must not show off their adornments and beautification except that ( part of it ) which becomes visible itself . And they must keep their veils ( and head - coverings ) drawn over their chests and breasts ( too ) , and must not display their adornments ( to anyone ) except their husbands , or their fathers or the fathers of their husbands , or their sons or the sons of their husbands , or their brothers or the sons of their brothers or the sons of their sisters , or ( the women of ) their ( own faith , the Muslim ) women or their female slaves or such male servants as are free from any lust and sexual urge , or the children who ( being minor ) have ( yet ) no sense of womens private parts . ( They too are exceptions . ) Nor must they ( while walking ) strike their feet ( on the ground in such a manner that ornaments jingle and ) thus get revealed and known which they are keeping hidden ( under the command of Sharia ) . And turn to Allah all of you in repentance , O believers , so that you may prosper ( by implementing these Commandments ) .
And marry those of your men and women who are leading an unmarried life ( despite reaching the age of marriage ) , and also ( marry ) those of your male and female slaves who are capable . If they are poor , Allah will make them rich out of His Bounty and Allah is Most Infinite , All - Knowing .
And those who cannot afford marriage ( for lack of financial means ) should adopt chastity until Allah enriches them out of His Bounty . And from among ( the male and female slaves ) under your control those who seek to write out a deed ( of manumission freedom through earning and paying , ) write it for them , and free them ( under the given condition ) if you see any good in them . Pay them ( also yourselves ) out of that wealth which Allah has given you ( to help them get freedom ) . And do not force your maids into prostitution if they desire to keep themselves chaste ( or wish to safeguard their chastity through marriage ) . And whoever will compel them , then ( even ) after they are compelled Allah is Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
And surely We have sent down to you evident and enlightening Revelations and some examples of those who have passed away before you ( i . e . like Aishas story , the story of Maryam [ Mary ] and the story of Yusuf [ Joseph ] ) . And ( this ) is for the direction and guidance of the Godfearing .
Allah is the Light of the heavens and the earth .
The likeness of His Light ( which is glowing in the world in the form of Muhammads Light ) is as a niche - like ( sacred breast ) wherein is glowing the lamp ( of Prophethood ) ,
the lamp contained in a crystal globe ( the radiant heart of Muhammad ) .
This globe is ( as dazzlingly bright owing to reflection of Allahs Light ) as a glittering star .
( This lamp of Prophethood ) is lit with the sacred olive tree ( i . e . either due to the blissful communication of divine Revelation from the Realm of Divinity or owing to the blissful genealogical tree of the Prophets and the Messengers ) .
It is neither ( merely ) eastern nor western ( rather universal and cosmic in its generously infinite luminosity .
The likeness of this lamp of Prophethood is as if ) its oil ( i . e . Light , due to its genuine and inherent potential capability ) is glowing , though no fire ( or the radiation of celestial miracles and divine revelation ) has even touched it yet .
( So it ) is Light upon Light ( i . e . the Light of Prophethood upon the Light of the Holy Essence , denoting a Self - embodying double Light ) .
Allah takes to ( the gnosis of ) His Light whom He wills .
And Allah explains similitudes for ( the Guidance of ) people and Allah is Well Aware of everything .
( This Light of Allah illumines ) such houses ( mosques and centres ) which Allah has ordained to exalt ( i . e . enhance their esteem and honour ) and remember His Name therein . ( These are the houses ) in which ( Allahs servants ) glorify Him morning and evening .
( Blessed with this Light ) are those servants of ( Allah ) whom neither trade nor sale diverts from the remembrance of Allah , and from establishing Prayer and paying Zakat ( the Alms - due . Even while performing their worldly duties ) they keep fearing the Day when hearts and eyes will ( all ) overturn ( with terror ) .
So that Allah may give them best reward for the ( good ) deeds they have done and may bestow upon them ( still ) more out of His Bounty . And Allah blesses with sustenance ( and provisions ) without measure whom He wills .
And the deeds of the disbelievers are like a mirage in a vast barren field which the thirsty one deems to be water , until when he gets near it he finds it to be nothing . ( Likewise in the Hereafter ) he would find Allah near him but Allah fully paid him back ( in the world ) . And Allah is Swift in taking account .
Or ( the disbelievers deeds are like ) the darkness in a deep sea covered by a wave , rolled upon ( yet ) by another wave and above that are clouds . ( This ) darkness is ( in layers ) one over another . When ( a person drowning into such a sea ) stretches his hand out , ( none ) can see it . And he for whom Allah has not formed any light ( of guidance ) , for him there is no light ( anywhere ) .
Have you not seen that ( all ) who are in the heavens and the earth glorify Allah alone , and the birds ( too in the air around ) with wings outspread ( do celebrate His praise ) ? Each one knows his own mode of Prayer and praise ( before the Presence of Allah ) . And Allah is Well Aware of the deeds they accomplish .
To Allah alone belongs the sovereignty of all the heavens and the earth and to Him shall all return .
Have you not seen that Allah is the One Who drives the cloud ( first ) gently , then joins its ( various pieces ) together , and then forms them into layers upon layers ? Then you see that from spaces between them rain issues forth and falls down . And He sends down hail from the clouds ( looking ) like snow - covered mountains in the same sky ( i . e . atmosphere ) . And then He throws it down upon whom He wills and turns it away from whom He likes . ( Moreover , He creates lightning from the same clouds . ) It seems as if the flash of the lightning ( of clouds ) would ( dazzle their eyes and ) snatch their sight away .
And Allah turns about the night and the day ( over each other ) . Surely there is ( great ) guidance in it for those who have reason and insight .
And Allah has originated ( chemical genesis of ) every moving creature from water . So , some of them creep on their bellies , some walk on two feet and some others on four . Allah creates what He wills . Surely Allah has Absolute Power over everything .
We have , indeed , sent down clear and enlightening Revelations ( through which ) Allah guides whom He wills to the straight path .
And they say : We have believed in Allah and the Messenger and we obey . Then after ( saying ) this a group of them turns away ( from their affirmation ) . And ( in fact ) these people are not ( at all ) believers .
And when they are called to Allah and His Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) that he may judge between them , a party of them turns away ( from appearing before the Messenger [ blessings and peace be upon him ] ) .
And had they been in the right , they would have come fast to him ( the Messenger ) most submissively .
Is there a disease ( of hypocrisy ) in their hearts ? Or do they doubt ( the majesty and glory of the Messenger ) ? Or do they fear that Allah and His Messenger will do them wrong ? ( Nay , ) they themselves are the wrongdoers .
The only saying of the believers , when they are called to Allah and His Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) in order that he may judge between them , is that they say : We have heard and we ( totally ) submit to obey . It is they who will prosper .
And whoever obeys Allah and His Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) and fears Allah and adopts Godwariness for Him , it is they who will achieve their goal .
And they swear most strongly ( and solemnly ) by Allah that if you order them , they shall certainly set out ( for Jihad [ the Sacred Struggle ] ) . Say : Do not swear . It is obedience that is ( required ) as per law . Allah is certainly Well Aware of the deeds you do .
Say : Obey Allah and His Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) , but if you turn away ( from obedience ) then ( beware that ) the Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) is simply responsible for the duty he is charged with and you are responsible for what you are charged with . And if you obey him you will be guided . And nothing is ( obligatory ) for the Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) but to convey ( the Commands ) clearly .
To those of you who believe and keep doing pious deeds Allah has given the promise ( whose fulfilment and implementation is obligatory for the Umma [ Community ] ) : He will surely bestow upon them Khilafa ( the trust of right to rule ) as He granted ( the right to ) rule to those who were before them . And ( through dominance and rule ) He will strengthen and stabilize their Din ( Religion ) for them which He has liked for them , and ( by this strength and rule ) He will for sure change their former state of fear ( which was due to their political , economic and social handicap ) to that of peace and security . They will worship Me ( fearlessly and ) will not associate any partner with Me ( i . e . will follow and obey only My Command and System ) . And after this whoever adopts ingratitude ( i . e . aversion to and denial of My Commands ) it is they who will be defiant ( and disobedient ) .
And establish ( the system of ) Prayers and ( ensure ) the payment of Zakat ( the Alms - due ) and accomplish ( absolute ) obedience to the Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) so that you may be granted mercy ( i . e . the blessings of sovereign rule , stability , peace and security may endure and continue ) .
And let it not occur to you at all that those who disbelieve and are ungrateful will make ( Allah ) powerless ( to destroy them ) in the earth . And Hell is their abode and the worst is that abode .
O Believers ! Your ( male and female ) slaves and your children who have not yet attained puberty must seek your permission ( to come to you ) on three occasions : ( first ) before Fajr ( dawn ) Prayer , ( second ) when you put off your clothes at noon ( for rest ) and ( third ) after Isha ( night ) Prayer ( when you go to bed for sleep . These are ) the three ( times ) of privacy for you . Other than these ( times ) , there is no sin on you or them ( because during remaining hours they ) keep coming and going frequently where you are from one to the other . That is how Allah makes clear the Revelations for you , and Allah is All - Knowing , All - Wise .
And when the children from among you reach puberty they must also seek your permission ( to come to you ) as ( other elders ) have been doing before them . That is how Allah makes clear His Commands for you . And Allah is All - Knowing All - Wise .
And there is no sin on those elderly house - confined women who have no desire ( now ) for marriage if they lay aside their garments ( i . e . additional outer coverings ) , provided they ( too ) do not show their adornment . And if they are ( more ) committed to self - restraint ( i . e . do not remove additional outer coverings as well ) that is better for them . And Allah is All - Hearing , All - Knowing .
There is no restriction on the blind , nor any blame on the lame , nor is there any sin on the sick and nor ( any harm ) for you if you eat ( food ) from your own houses or from the houses of your fathers , or the houses of your mothers , or the houses of your brothers , or the houses of your sisters , or the houses of your fathers brothers , or the houses of your fathers sisters , or the houses of your mothers brothers , or the houses of your mothers sisters , or the houses whose keys are in your charge ( i . e . whose owners have permitted you for any use . Nor is there any harm to eat food ) from your friends houses . There is no sin on you whether you all eat together or separately . Then when you enter the houses greet ( the members of ) your ( family ) with the greeting of peace and security . ( This ) is a blissful and pure greeting from Allah . Thus Allah makes clear His Verses for you so that you may understand ( the commands of the Sharia and manners of life ) .
The believers are only those who have believed in Allah and His Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) , and when they are with you for some ( collective ) issue which brings ( the people ) together , then they should not go away from there ( i . e . they should participate whole - heartedly to work for collective coherence and unity among the Umma [ Community ] ) until they have obtained permission from you ( owing to some special excuse . O Esteemed Prophet , ) surely those who seek permission from you ( believing your Majesty the Supreme and Ultimate Authority ) it is they who are the believers in Allah and His Prophet . So when they seek from you permission ( to go ) for some affair of theirs , then ( you are the Supreme Sovereign Authority ) . Grant leave whom you please and ask forgiveness for them from Allah ( even on going away from your company by obtaining your permission , lest they should be seized even on that ) . Surely Allah is Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
( O Muslims ! ) Do not regard the calling of the Prophet among you like your calling of one another . ( When calling the Holy Prophet is not like your mutual calling among you , then how can the Holy Personality of the Prophet be like yours ? ) Surely Allah knows those from among you ( well ) who slip away quietly ( from the presence of the Holy Prophet ) under the shelter of one another . So let those who go against the Messengers command ( of veneration and devotion ) feel afraid lest some trial should overtake them ( here in the world ) or a painful torment seize them in the Hereafter .
Beware ! To Allah belongs ( all ) that is in the heavens and in the earth . He certainly knows your state of mind ( i . e . state of belief or that of hypocrisy ) . And on the Day when they will be returned to Him , He will disclose to them what they used to do and Allah knows everything full well .
Blessed is He ( Allah ) Who sent down to His ( most beloved and most intimate ) servant the Criterion ( the Quran ) that ( draws the difference between right and wrong and ) gives judgment in order that he may be a Warner to all the worlds .
He ( Allah ) to Whom belongs the Sovereignty of the heavens and the earth , and Who has not taken ( to Himself ) any children , nor has He any partner in His Kingdom and He alone has created everything , and then destined ( i . e . formatted ) it exactly according to a definite estimation ( its features , functions , time frame and everything for all the stages of its growth and survival ) .
And these ( polytheists ) have taken besides Him other gods which cannot create anything and are themselves created and possess no power either to harm or to benefit themselves and control neither death nor life , nor ( have they any authority ) to raise up ( after death ) and assemble .
And the disbelievers say : This ( Quran ) is but a lie which this ( claimant of Prophethood ) has fabricated and other people have helped him in ( inventing ) it . Surely the disbelievers have come down to sheer injustice and falsehood .
And they say : ( This Quran comprises ) fables of the ancients which this man has got written ; then these ( fables ) are recited to him morning and evening ( in order to memorize and narrate further ) .
Say : He ( Allah ) has sent down this ( Quran ) Who knows all the secrets ( present ) in the heavens and the earth . Surely He is Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
And they say : What is the matter with this Messenger ? He eats food and walks about in the marketplaces . Why has an angel not been sent down to him that he might ( join ) him as a Warner ?
Or a treasure should have been sent down to him or ( at least ) he should have owned a garden so that he might eat ( of its income ) . And the wrongdoers say ( to the Muslims ) : You are following but a man spellbound .
( O Esteemed Beloved ! ) Just see what sort of comparisons they utter for you . So they have gone astray and cannot find any path ( to Guidance ) .
Most Blessed is He . If He pleases He can produce gardens for you ( far ) better than these ( here in the world ) beneath which streams flow , and raise for you magnificent palaces ( but these are not the conditions for a Prophet and Messenger ) .
But they have denied the Last Hour ( as well ) , and for everyone who denies the Last Hour We have prepared the blazing Fire ( of Hell ) .
When that ( Fire of Hell ) will be visible to them ( even ) from a distant place , they will hear it raging and roaring .
And when , tightly bound ( together or bound to their satans , ) they will be thrown into it from some narrow place , then they will cry out for ( their ) destruction .
( It will be said to them : ) Do not call out ( just ) for one destruction today but call for many more destructions .
Say : Is this ( a ) better ( state ) or the ( life of ) eternal Paradise promised to the Godfearing ? This is their reward ( of deeds ) and their abode .
( All ) that they long for will be ( available ) for them in these ( gardens of Paradise ) . They shall live ( in it ) for ever . That is a coveted promise which your Lord has made a ( bountiful ) obligation upon Himself ( and which will surely be fulfilled ) .
And on that Day Allah will assemble them together with those they worshipped besides Allah . He will then say : Was it you who led these My servants astray or did they ( themselves ) go astray from the path ?
They will say : Glory be to You . It did not become us ( even ) to take friends other than You ( let alone asking them to worship others besides You ) . But , ( O Lord , ) You bestowed upon them and their fathers worldly riches to such an extent that they forgot ( even ) Your Remembrance . And these were but the ( doomed ) people to be destroyed .
( O disbelievers ! ) They have denied what you said . So , ( now ) you can neither avert the torment nor help yourselves . And , ( listen , ) whoever of you does injustice We will make him taste mighty torment .
And We did not send Messengers before you but ( that ) they certainly ate food and also walked about in the marketplaces ( as needed ) . And We have made you a trial for one another . Will you observe patience ( in trial ) ? And your Lord is All - Seeing .
And those who do not hope for meeting with Us say : Why were angels not sent down to us ? Or if we could see our Lord ( with our own eyes , we would certainly believe ) . In fact they esteem ( themselves ) very highly in their hearts and are rebelling beyond bounds .
The Day when they will see the angels , there will be no matter of joy for the evildoers anyway on that Day . They will rather say ( frightened on seeing them ) : Would that there were a barricade ( which could save us from them ! Or the angles , on seeing them , will say : Entry to Paradise is totally forbidden for you . )
And ( then ) We shall turn to the deeds they ( presumably ) did ( in life ) and shall make them scattered dust particles .
On that Day , the lodging for the inmates of Paradise will be the best and their resting place ( too ) will be excellent ( where they will retire for a nap after the reckoning noon ) .
And that Day the sky will be rent asunder , changed into ( the resemblance of smoke , like ) a cloud , and the angels will be sent down ranks upon ranks .
That Day True Sovereignty will belong to the Most Kind ( Lord ) and that will be very hard ( i . e . tough ) Day on the disbelievers .
And that Day every wrongdoer will bite his hands ( in fury and frustration and ) will say : Would that I had taken the path ( of Guidance by joining ) the companionship of the Holy Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) !
Ah ! Woe to me ! Would that I had not taken such a one for a friend !
Surely he led me astray from the direction and guidance after it had come to me , and Satan leaves man helpless and forlorn ( in the time of distress ) .
And the ( Holy ) Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) will submit : O Lord , surely my people had utterly abandoned this Quran .
And that is how We made for every Prophet ( their ) enemy from the evildoers ( who used to oppose their Prophetic mission , and this way , a conflict between the forces of right and wrong would develop and a favourable and congenial environment for revolution would take shape against tyranny , oppression and injustice ) . And your Lord is sufficient to guide and help .
And the disbelievers say : Why has the Quran not been ( put together and ) sent down to this ( Prophet ) in one go ? It has been revealed gradually ( piecemeal ) so that by this We may strengthen your ( most sanctified ) heart , and ( that is why ) We have recited it gradually with pauses ( in order that your heart may feel tranquil by receiving Our Message again and again ) .
And these ( disbelievers ) do not bring to you any ( such ) instance ( as an objection or inquiry ) , but We provide you with the Truth ( to reply it ) and an explanation better ( than that ) .
( They ) are such people as will be driven headlong towards Hell . It is they who are the worst ones as for their abode and are ( also ) much distracted from the ( straight ) path .
And surely We gave Musa ( Moses ) the Book and appointed his brother Harun ( Aaron ) with him as his minister ( for his help ) .
Then We said : Go both of you to the people who have rejected Our Signs . ( But when , despite that , they did not abstain from belying Us ) We totally destroyed them .
And the people of Nuh ( [ Noah ] as well ) when they denied the Prophets , We drowned them and made them a Sign of warning for ( other ) people . And We have prepared a painful torment for the wrongdoers .
And ( We also annihilated ) ? d and Thamud and the residents of Rass and many ( other ) people in between .
And We explained examples to each one ( of them for direction and guidance , ) but ( when they did not refrain from rebellion ) We wiped them off completely .
And certainly these ( disbelievers ) have passed by that town on which was showered a disastrous rain ( of stones ) . Did they not see that ( ruined town ) ? But the truth is that they do not expect to be raised up ( after death ) .
And , ( O Esteemed Beloved , ) when they see you they do nothing but make fun of you ( and say : ) Is this ( the one ) Allah has sent as a Messenger ?
He had nearly turned us away from our gods , had we not held fast to their ( worship ) . And when they see the torment , they will soon realize who was astray .
Have you seen him who has taken the desire of his lower self as god ? Would you then become a guardian over him ?
Do you think that most of them hear or understand ? ( Nay , ) they have become like cattle , rather worse in error than they are .
Have you not had a glance of ( the Might of ) your Lord , how He lengthens the shadow ( till noon ) ? And had He willed He could certainly have made it stationary . Then We have made the sun a proof of this ( shadow ) .
Then , drawing this ( shadow ) little by little towards Ourselves , We roll it up .
And He is the One Who has made the night a ( wrapper - like ) covering for you and made sleep ( a means of ) rest ( for you ) and the day a time to get up ( for work ) .
And He is the One Who sends the breezes as good news before ( the rain of ) His Mercy . And it is We Who send down pure ( and cleansing ) water from the sky .
So that We may give life with that to ( any ) dead city and ( furthermore ) We provide this ( water ) for drink to many cattle and ( nomadic ) people that We have created .
And surely We keep distributing this ( rain ) among them ( on the scale of different times and cities ) so that they may contemplate . Even then most people did not accept ( anything ) except ingratitude .
And had We willed , We would have sent a Warner in every town .
So , ( O man of faith , ) do not follow the disbelievers and launch a large - scale struggle against them by means of ( logic and preaching of the Quran ) .
And He is the One Who joined two rivers , this ( one ) very sweet and freshening and that ( other one ) very salty and bitter . And He set a barrier and a strong partition between them .
And He is the One Who created man from ( a sperm drop resembling ) water , and made for him ( kinship by ) lineage and in - laws . And your Lord is All - Powerful .
And they ( disbelievers ) worship besides Allah those ( idols ) that can neither bring them any profit nor do them any harm . And the disbeliever is ( always ) a helper ( of Satan ) in ( disobeying ) his Lord .
And We have not sent you but as a Bearer of good news ( for the obedient servants of Allah ) and as a Warner ( to the rebels ) .
Say : I do not ask you for any compensation for this ( preaching ) but that whoever desires to take a path to ( reach ) his Lord ( may step in ) .
And put your trust in the Ever - Living ( Lord ) Who will never die , and glorify Him with His praise , and Sufficient is His awareness of the sins of His servants .
He Who created the heavenly spheres and the earth and this ( universe ) in between them in six periods . Then He settled Himself on the Throne ( befitting His Majesty . He ) is Most Kind . ( O aspirant to His gnosis ! ) Ask of Him someone who has attained to His awareness . ( The unaware do not have any gnosis of Him . )
And when it is said to them : Prostrate yourselves before the Most Kind ( Lord ) , the ( deniers of the Truth ) say : What is the Most Kind Lord ? Shall we prostrate ourselves before whatever you command us ? And this ( command ) increased only hatred in them .
Most Blessed and Most Glorified is He Who made vast mansions of heavenly spheres ( in the form of galaxies ) in the heavenly cosmos and made ( the sun ) in it a ( light - generating and heat - emitting ) lamp and a shining moon ( in the solar system ) .
And He is the One Who made the day and the night rotate after each other for him who desires to contemplate or intends to be grateful . ( There is direction and guidance in these creative powers . )
And the ( favourite ) servants of the Most Kind ( Lord ) are those who walk gently on the earth and when the ignorant ( i . e . impolite ) people say to them something ( unlikable ) they ( get aside ) saying : Peace .
And ( these ) are the ones who spend their nights prostrating themselves and standing before their Lord ( cloaked in submissiveness ) .
And ( these ) are the people who pray ( all the time before the Presence of Allah ) : O our Lord , turn away from us the torment of Hell . Surely its torment is most injurious ( and everlasting ) .
Surely that is an evil lodging ( for temporary lodgers ) and an evil abode ( for permanent dwellers ) .
And ( these ) are the people who are neither extravagant nor miserly when they spend . And their spending is ( based on ) a balance between the two extremes ( of extravagance and miserliness ) .
And these are the people who do not worship any other god apart from Allah , nor do they kill the soul whose killing without any just cause Allah has forbidden , and nor do they commit adultery . And whoever does this will receive the punishment due for the sin .
His punishment will be doubled on the Day of Rising and disgraced and humialted he will live in it forever .
But whoever repents and believes and does good deeds , so these are the people whose evil deeds Allah will change into good ones . And Allah is Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
And whoever repents and executes good , so he returns to Allah ( the way ) returning is due .
And these are the people who do not attend , ( both verbally and practically , ) the false and untruthful matters , and when they pass by evil activities , they pass on ( observing caution ) with utmost nobility and dignity .
And these are the people who , when they are directed and guided by means of Revelations of their Lord , do not fall at them deaf and blind ( but reflect on them ) .
And these are the people who submit ( before the Presence of Allah ) : O our Lord , grant us coolness of eyes in our wives and our children , and make us leaders of the Godfearing people .
They will be rewarded with lofty palaces ( in Paradise ) as recompense for their patience and steadfastness and will be welcomed therein with greetings and salutations of Peace .
They will live therein forever . Those ( lofty palaces in Paradise ) are the most excellent lodgings and ( decent ) abodes .
Say : My Lord cares little for you if you do not worship ( Him ) . But you have indeed rejected ( Him ) . So now this ( denial ) will ever endure as permanent torment ( for you ) .
Ta , Sin , Mim . ( Only Allah and the Messenger [ blessings and peace be upon him ] know the real meaning . )
These are the Verses of the Book that makes clear ( the Truth ) .
( O Esteemed Beloved ! ) You will perhaps risk your ( dearest ) life ( grieving ) that they do not accept faith .
If We intend , We should send down upon them ( such ) a Sign from heaven as their necks would not but bow down before it .
And there does not come to them any fresh direction and guidance from the Most Kind ( Lord ) but they turn away from it .
Thus they have indeed denied ( the Truth ) , so the news of what they used to make fun of will reach them soon .
And have they not discerned the earth what a variety of excellent vegetation We have caused to grow in it ?
Surely there is a Sign in it ( of Allahs Might ) but most of them are not the ones to believe .
And assuredly your Lord alone is the Almighty , Ever - Merciful .
And ( recall the incident ) when your Lord called to Musa ( Moses ) : Go to the wrongdoing people .
( That is ) the people of Pharaoh . Do they not fear ( Allah ) ?
Musa ( Moses ) submitted : O my Lord , I fear that they will reject me .
And my breast constricts ( under such adverse circumstances ) and my tongue does not express ( fluently ) , so send ( Gabriel with revelation ) to Harun ( Aaron as well so that he becomes my helper ) .
And they also have a charge against me ( of killing a Coptic ) , so I fear they may kill me .
( Allah ) said : By no means , so go both of you with Our Signs . Surely We are with you , hearing ( everything ) .
So go both of you to Pharaoh and say : We are the Messengers ( sent ) by the Lord of all the worlds .
( Our aim is that ) you send the Children of Israel with us ( setting them free ) .
Pharaoh said : Did we not bring you up among us as a child and you spent many years of your life with us ?
And ( then ) you committed that deed which you committed ( i . e . you killed a Coptic ) , and you are one of the ungrateful ( you have forgotten our guardianship and favours ) .
( Musa [ Moses ] ) said : When I did that deed I was unaware ( that even a single blow would take his life ) .
So ( at that time ) , I went out of your ( line of control ) when I feared your ( designs ) . Then my Lord bestowed on me the Commandment ( of Prophethood ) and ( finally ) made me one of the Messengers .
And is that ( any ) favour of which you are reminding me ? ( That happened also because ) you had enslaved ( all my people ) the Children of Israel .
Pharaoh said : What is the Lord of all the worlds ?
( Musa [ Moses ] ) said : ( He ) is the Lord of all the heavens and the earth and the ( whole universe ) between the two if you are a firm believer .
He said to those seated around him : Are you not listening ?
( Musa [ Moses ] ) added : ( The One Who ) is your Lord and the Lord of your forefathers ( too ) .
( Pharaoh ) said : Surely your Messenger that has been sent to you is but insane .
( Musa [ Moses ] ) said : ( He ) is the Lord of the east and the west and ( the whole universe ) between the two if you have ( some ) sense .
( Pharaoh ) said : ( O Musa [ Moses , ] ) if you take a god other than me , I will certainly ( arrest and ) put you among the prisoners .
( Musa [ Moses ] ) said : Even if I bring you something manifest ( also as a miracle ) ?
( Pharaoh ) said : Bring it if you are truthful .
So Musa ( Moses ) put his staff down ( on the ground ) and that at once became a serpent evidently clear .
And ( Musa [ Moses ] ) brought out his hand ( after putting it under his armpit ) and there it became radiant white to the viewers .
( Pharaoh ) said to the chiefs ( sitting ) around him : Undoubtedly he is a ( highly ) learned sorcerer .
He seeks to drive you out of your land by ( the force of ) his magic . So what is your opinion ( about him now ) ?
They said : Put off ( the announcement of sentence for ) him and his brother ( Harun [ Aaron ] ) and send callers to ( all ) the cities ( to summon the sorcerers ) .
They shall bring to you every high ranking expert sorcerer .
So all the sorcerers were assembled at the appointed time on the fixed day .
And it was said to the people ( by Pharaohs side ) : You will assemble together ( on this occasion ) .
So that we may follow ( Din [ Religion ] of ) the sorcerers if they overmaster ( Musa [ Moses ] and Harun [ Aaron ] ) .
Then when the sorcerers arrived they said to Pharaoh : Is there ( also ) any reward ( fixed ) for us if we gain the upper hand ( in the contest ) ?
( Pharaoh ) said : Yes indeed ! ( Instead of the rewarded ones , ) you will straight away join ( my ) closer circle ( and intimate relationship is far higher in grade than reward ) .
Musa ( Moses ) said to those ( sorcerers ) : Throw down the ( magic ) items which you are about to throw .
So they cast down their strings and sticks and said : By the honour of Pharaoh we shall certainly win .
Then Musa ( Moses ) cast down his staff which , ( changing into a serpent , ) began swallowing up those things which they had made look different ( from reality ) through trickery .
So , all the magicians fell down prostrating themselves .
They said : We believe in the Lord of all the worlds .
The Lord of Musa ( Moses ) and Harun ( Aaron ) .
( Pharaoh ) said : You have believed in Him before I granted you permission . Surely it is he ( Musa [ Moses ] ) who is your chief ( coach ) and who has taught you magic . You will soon come to know ( your end ) . I will definitely cut off your hands and your feet on opposite sides and will surely crucify you all .
They said : There is no harm ( in it ) . Surely we are to return to our Lord .
We have strong hope that our Lord will forgive our sins since it is we who are the first to believe ( now ) .
And We revealed to Musa ( Moses ) : Take away My servants ( from here ) by night ; you will certainly be chased .
Then Pharaoh sent callers to the cities .
( And conveyed : ) Surely these ( Children of Israel ) are but a small party .
And undoubtedly they are provoking us .
And verily we all are ( also ) alert and vigilant .
Then We drove them ( Pharaohs people ) out of gardens and springs .
And ( also expelled them ) from treasures and refined dwellings .
So ( We did ) and made the Children of Israel inheritors of all ( those bounties ) .
Then at sunrise they ( Pharaohs people ) chased them .
So when the two parties came face to face the companions of Musa ( Moses ) said : ( Now ) we are sure to be caught .
( Musa [ Moses ] ) said : Never ! Surely my Lord is with me . He will show me the way ( to deliverance ) just now .
Then We revealed to Musa ( Moses ) : Strike the sea with your staff . So the sea split ( into twelve parts ) and each part became like a huge mountain .
And We brought the other party ( Pharaoh and his companions ) closer to that place .
And We saved Musa ( Moses ) and ( also ) all those who were with him .
Then We drowned the others ( i . e . Pharaoh and his people ) .
Surely in this ( incident ) there is a great Sign ( of Allahs Infinite Power ) . And most of them were not the believers .
And verily your Lord alone is Almighty , Ever - Merciful indeed .
And also recite to them the story of Ibrahim ( Abraham ) .
When he said to his father and his people : What do you worship ?
They said : We worship idols and remain stuck to their ( worship and care ) .
( Ibrahim [ Abraham ] ) said : Do they hear you when you call ( them ) ?
Or do they bring you any profit or loss ?
They said : ( We do not know that ) but we found our fathers doing the same .
( Ibrahim [ Abraham ] ) said : Have you ( ever ) thought ( of their reality ) you worship ?
( Did ) you or ( any of ) your forefathers ( ever realize ) ?
So ( all ) these ( idols ) are enemies to me except the Lord of all the worlds . ( He is the One Who is my God . )
He Who created me and He is the One Who guides me .
And He is the One Who provides me with food and drink .
And when I fall ill , He is the One Who cures me .
He is the One Who will cause me to die and then He alone will give me life ( again ) .
And Who , I hope , will forgive me my misdeeds on the Day of Judgment .
O my Lord ! Bless me with excellence in knowledge and deeds , and include me among those who deserve Your exceptional intimacy .
And ordain for me virtuous remembrance and acceptance among the coming generations ( too ) .
And include me among the inheritors of the Garden of Bliss .
And forgive my father . Surely he was of the misguided .
And disgrace me not on the Day ( when ) people will be raised up ( from the graves ) .
The Day when neither wealth nor sons will profit .
But he alone ( will be the gainer ) who appears before the Presence of Allah with a heart protected ( from ) and pure ( of all evils ) .
And ( on that Day ) Paradise will be brought closer to the Godfearing ( and self - protecting ) .
And Hell will be uncovered before the misguided .
And it will be said to them : Where are those ( idols ) which you used to worship .
Besides Allah ? Can they help you or can they help themselves ( to save themselves from Hell ) ?
So into Hell will be thrown headlong ( the idols as well as ) the people who lost the straight road .
And all the troops of Iblis ( too will be hurled into Hell ) .
Those ( misguided people ) will say while disputing among themselves ( in the Hell ) .
By Allah , we were in manifest error .
When we held you equal to the Lord of all the worlds .
And no other than ( these ) evildoers led us astray .
So we do not have any intercessor ( today ) .
Nor do we have any passionate friend .
Alas ! If once we could have ( a chance to ) return ( to the world ) , we would become believers .
Surely in this ( incident ) there is a great Sign ( of Allahs Infinite Power ) . And most of them were not the believers .
And verily your Lord alone is Almighty , Ever - Merciful .
The people of Nuh ( Noah also ) rejected the Messengers .
When their ( kinship ) brother Nuh ( Noah ) said to them : Do you not fear ( Allah ) ?
Indeed I ( have come as ) a trustworthy Messenger to you .
So fear Allah and obey me .
And I do not demand of you any wages for this ( preaching of the Truth ) . My reward is only with the Lord of all the worlds .
So fear Allah and obey me .
They said : Should we believe in you while the people of the lowest and most worthless ( classes of society ) are following you ?
( Nuh [ Noah ] ) said : What has my knowledge to do with their ( professional ) tasks ?
Their account is only with my Lord . If you could but understand ( what the real honour and dishonour is ) !
And I am not the one who casts out the believers .
I am only a clear Warner .
They said : O Nuh ( Noah ) , if you do not stop ( saying these things ) , then surely you will be stoned to death .
( Nuh [ Noah ] ) submitted : O my Lord , my people have rejected me .
So judge between me and them and deliver me and the believers who are in my company .
So We delivered him and those who were ( aboard ) with him in the fully loaded Ark .
Then thereafter We drowned all the rest .
Surely in this ( incident ) there is a great Sign ( of Allahs Infinite Power ) and most of them were not the believers .
And verily your Lord alone is Almighty , Ever - Merciful .
( The people of ) Ad ( too ) rejected the Messengers .
When their ( kinship ) brother Hud said to them : Do you not fear ( Allah ) ?
Verily I ( have come as ) a trustworthy Messenger to you .
So fear Allah and obey me .
And I do not demand of you any wages for this ( preaching of the Truth ) . My reward is only with the Lord of all the worlds .
Do you build a monument on every high point ( merely ) for vanity and vain pursuits ?
And do you erect strongly - built palaces ( having pools ) with the hope of living ( in the world ) forever ?
And when you lay hand on someone you do it like ruthless tyrants .
So fear Allah and obey me .
And fear Him ( Allah ) Who has helped you with the things which you know .
He has helped you with cattle and children .
And ( also ) with gardens and springs .
Surely I fear the torment of a Terrible Day coming upon you .
They said : It is all the same to us whether you admonish or do not become of those who admonish ( we shall not believe ) .
It is nothing ( else ) but the habits ( and customs ) only of the forerunners ( which we cannot abandon ) .
And we will not be afflicted with the torment .
So they rejected him ( Hud ) and We destroyed them . Surely in this ( incident ) there is a great Sign ( of Allahs Infinite Power ) and most of them were not the believers .
And verily your Lord alone is Almighty , Ever - Merciful .
( The people of ) Thamud ( also ) rejected the Messengers .
When Salih , their ( kinship ) brother , said to them : Do you not fear ( Allah ) ?
Verily I ( have come as ) a trustworthy Messenger to you .
So fear Allah and obey me .
And I do not demand of you any wages for this ( preaching of the Truth ) . My reward is only with the Lord of all the worlds .
Will you be left in peace and contentment ( forever ) in these ( bounties ) which are ( available to you ) here ?
( Here ) in the gardens and springs ?
And in crops and palm - trees which have soft and fine blossoms ?
And , skilled ( in stone - carving ) , you carve out houses in the mountains .
So fear Allah and obey me .
And do not obey the instructions of those who exceed limits .
Those who spread destructive activities in the land and do not do constructive works ( for society ) .
They said : You are but of the magic - stricken people .
You are but a human being like us , so bring some Sign if you are truthful .
( Salih ) said : ( That Sign ) is this she - camel . A time for water is ( appointed ) for her and on an appointed day is your turn for water .
And do not touch her with evil ( intention ) or the torment of a ( gravely ) terrible Day will seize you .
But they hamstrung her ( and killed her ) . Then they became remorseful ( because of what they did ) .
So the torment seized them . Surely in this ( incident ) there is a great Sign and most of them were not the believers .
And verily your Lord alone is Almighty , Ever - Merciful .
( The people of ) Lut ( Lot ) also rejected the Messengers .
When Lut ( Lot ) , their ( kinship ) brother , said to them : Do you not fear ( Allah ) ?
Verily I ( have come as ) a trustworthy Messenger to you .
So fear Allah and obey me .
And I do not demand of you any wages for this ( preaching of the Truth ) . My reward is only with the Lord of all the worlds .
Do you approach only males ( to satisfy your sexual desire ) from among the people of the world .
And you leave your wives your Lord has created for you ? You are rather of those who exceed bounds ( in transgression ) .
They said : O Lut ( Lot ) , if you do not stop ( saying these things ) , you will surely become of the exiled .
( Lut [ Lot ] ) said : No doubt I am of those who are disgusted by your practice .
O Lord ! Deliver me and my family from ( the consequent suffering of ) this practice which they are doing .
So We delivered him and his entire family .
Except for an old woman who was among those who stayed behind .
Then We destroyed the others .
And We rained on them ( stones ) . So how devastating was that rain on the people who were stressed with horror !
Surely in this ( incident ) there is a great Sign and most of them were not the believers .
And verily your Lord alone is Almighty , Ever - Merciful .
The dwellers of al - Aika ( i . e . the People of the Wood also ) rejected the Messengers .
When Shuaib said to them : Do you not fear ( Allah ) ?
Verily I ( have come as ) a trustworthy Messenger to you .
So fear Allah and obey me .
And I do not demand of you any wages for this ( preaching of the Truth ) . My reward is only with the Lord of all the worlds .
Always fill up full measure and do not become injurious ( to the rights of the people ) .
And weigh with a straight balance .
And do not give to the people their things ( weighing ) less than what is due , nor provoke strife in the land ( by such moral , economic and social corruption and fraud ) .
And fear Him ( Allah ) Who has created you and the former generations .
They said : ( O Shuaib , ) you are but of the magic - stricken people .
And you are but a human being like us and surely we consider you among the liars .
So , make a piece of heaven fall on us , if you are truthful .
( Shuaib ) said : My Lord knows best these ( frauds ) which you are doing .
So they rejected Shuaib and the torment of the Day of Shadow seized them . No doubt that was the torment of a terrible day .
Surely in this ( incident ) there is a great Sign and most of them were not the believers .
And verily your Lord alone is Almighty , Ever - Merciful .
And indeed this Quran has been revealed by the Lord of all the worlds .
The Trusted Spirit ( Gabriel ) has descended with it .
Upon your ( most illumined ) heart so that you may be a Warner ( to the disobedient ) .
( It is sent down ) in the plain Arabic language .
And verily it is ( also mentioned ) in the scriptures of former communities .
And is it not for them a ( sufficient ) proof ( of the Truth of the Quran and the Truth of Muhammads Prophethood [ blessings and peace be upon him ] ) that the learned scholars of the Children of Israel ( also ) recognize it ?
And if We had sent it down to any of the non - Arabs .
And he had recited it to these people , ( even then ) they would not have believed in it .
Thus have We forced its ( denial ) firmly into the hearts of the sinners .
They will not believe in it until they see the painful torment .
So that ( torment ) will come upon them all of a sudden and they will not ( even ) perceive it .
They will then say : Shall we be given respite ?
Do they seek to hasten Our punishment ?
Tell Me , if We provide them benefit for years .
Then comes to them that ( torment ) which they are being promised .
Then what will those resources which they were utilizing do ( to drive that torment away from them ) ?
And We have not destroyed any town except those ( towns ) for which Warners had come .
( And that too ) for direction and guidance . And We were not unjust .
And it is not Satans who descended with this ( Quran ) .
They are neither worthy nor capable ( of it ) .
Surely they have been debarred from hearing ( this Divine Communication ) .
So , ( O My servant , ) do not call upon any other god besides Allah lest you become of those who are punished .
And , ( O Esteemed Beloved , ) warn your close relatives ( of Our torment ) .
And extend your ( merciful , kind and supporting ) hand to those believers who follow you .
But , if they disobey you , then say : I am disgusted by these ( evil ) deeds which you are doing .
And put your trust in Almighty , Ever - Merciful ( Lord ) .
Who sees you when you stand up ( for Tahajjud Prayer in the solitary hours at night ) .
And Who ( also keeps ) seeing your turning movements among those who prostrate themselves in Prayer .
Verily He is All - Hearing , All - Knowing .
Shall I tell you upon whom the satans descend ?
They descend on every lying sinner ( who weaves false allegations ) .
Who pour ( into their ears ) hearsay and most of them are liars .
And only the digressers follow the poets .
Have you not seen that these ( poets ) wander distracted ( purposelessly ) in every valley ( of reflections ? They take little serious and true interest in reality . They rather remain happy and lost in verbal leaps and imaginative jumps ) .
And that they say ( such things ) that they do not ( themselves ) do .
Except for those ( poets ) who believe and do pious deeds persistently and remember Allah abundantly ( i . e . they eulogize Allah and the Holy Prophet [ blessings and peace be upon him ] in their poetry ) , and avenge themselves after they are wronged ( by means of poetic compositions , and defend Islam and the oppressed rather inspire them with zeal through their poetry . This type of poetry is not condemnable . ) And those who do wrong will soon come to know to what place of turning they shall turn back ( after death ) .
Ta , Sin . ( Only Allah and the Messenger [ blessings and peace be upon him ] know the real meaning . ) These are the Verses of the ( Holy ) Quran and an enlightening Book
A guidance and good news for ( those ) believers .
Who establish Prayer and pay Zakat ( the Alms - due ) and it is they who believe in the Hereafter ( as well ) .
Surely those who do not believe in the Hereafter , We have made their ( evil ) deeds appear fascinating ( to them ) . So they wander distracted ( in error ) .
It is they for whom there is an evil punishment , and it is they who are ( the greatest ) losers in the Hereafter .
And surely you are being taught ( this ) Quran from All - Wise , All - Knowing ( Lord ) .
( Recall that incident ) when Musa ( Moses ) said to his wife : I have seen a fire ( or I have perceived a flash of love and liking in the fire ) . Soon I will bring you some news from it ( for which we have been wandering in deserts and forests since long ) , or I bring ( you also from there ) some burning brand so that you ( too ) may feel the burn ( of its heat ) .
So when he neared it , a call was given : Blessed is He Who is ( luminously unveiling His veil of Light ) in this fire and ( also ) he who is around it ( in the reflection of the theophanies of Allahs Light ) . And Allah is Holy ( and Glorified High above any resemblance and physical manifestation ) , the Lord of all the worlds .
( O Musa [ Moses ] ! ) It is I , Allah ( Unveiling My Light ) , Almighty , All - Wise .
And , ( O Musa [ Moses ] , ) cast your staff ( on the ground ) . So when ( Musa ( Moses ) after casting the staff on the ground ) saw it moving fast as if it were a serpent , he ( reacting naturally ) turned back running and did not ( even ) look back . ( Allah said : ) O Musa ( Moses ) , do not fear . Surely the Messengers do not fear in My Presence .
But whoever wrongs , then after doing evil replaces ( it ) with good , then I am indeed Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
And put your hand into the opening of your collar . It will come out ( turned ) radiant white without any ill . ( Both these are ) of the nine Signs ( of Allah ) . Go ( with them ) to Pharaoh and his people . Surely they are disobedient people .
But when Our clear and sight - giving Signs reached them , they said : This is plain magic .
And out of vanity and wickedness , they rejected them straight away while their hearts had accepted these ( Signs as true ) . So see how ( evil ) was the end of the evildoers !
And indeed We bestowed upon Dawud ( David ) and Sulaiman ( [ Solomon ] extraordinary knowledge ) and both said : All praise be to Allah Who has exalted us above many of His believing servants .
And Sulaiman ( Solomon ) succeeded Dawud ( David ) and said : O people , we have been taught the speech of birds ( as well ) and we have been granted everything . No doubt , this is most obvious Grace ( of Allah ) .
And armies for Sulaiman ( Solomon ) were collected from among ( all species of ) the jinn , human beings and birds . So they were held on ( in his service ) for discipline and training .
Until when these ( troops ) reached an open field of ants , one ant said : O ants , enter your dwellings , lest Sulaiman ( Solomon ) and his troops crush you while they remain just unaware .
So he ( Sulaiman [ Solomon ] ) smiled , feeling amused at the ants words , and submitted : O Lord , keep me by Your bestowal firm on it that I remain ever - thankful for Your favour which You have conferred on me and on my parents , and I do such pious deeds as You are pleased with , and admit me by Your mercy among your pious slaves enjoying exceptional nearness to You .
And Sulaiman ( Solomon ) inspected the birds and said : How is it that I do not see the hoopoe ? Or has he ( really ) vanished ?
I will certainly award him severe punishment ( for being absent without leave ) or will certainly slaughter him , or he will bring me a sound plea ( of being not guilty ) .
It was only for a little while that he stayed ( outside ) , then he ( appeared and ) said : I have come to know a thing that is ( perhaps ) not in your knowledge , and I have brought you from ( the land of ) Saba ( Sheba ) a sure and true piece of news .
I have found ( there ) a woman who is ruling over them ( i . e . the citizens of the land of Saba [ Sheba ] ) , and she has been given everything ( of possession and authority ) , and she has a great throne .
I found her and her people prostrating themselves before the sun instead of Allah . And Satan has made their ( evil ) deeds highly fascinating for them and has hindered them from the path ( of the Oneness of Allah ) . So they are not getting guidance .
( They are hindered ) so that they do not fall in prostration before the Presence of Allah , Who brings forth ( i . e . unveils ) the ( realities and forms of matter ) hidden in the heavens and the earth and knows ( all ) those things which you hide and which you disclose .
There is none worthy of worship except Allah . He alone is the Master of the Supreme Throne of Authority .
( Sulaiman [ Solomon ] ) said : We see right now whether you speak the truth or you are of the liars .
Go with this letter of mine and deliver it to them . Then withdraw from them and see what they turn to .
( The Queen ) said : O chiefs , a noble letter has been delivered to me .
That ( letter ) has indeed ( come ) from Sulaiman ( Solomon ) , and that begins with the Name of Allah , Who is Most Kind , Ever - Merciful .
( Its contents read : ) Do not ( strive to ) rise above me and come to me in submission .
( The Queen ) said : O courtiers , advise me in this matter . I do not make a final decision on any matter until you come to me and state your opinions ( for or against the matter ) .
They said : We are powerful and great warriors but the command is your prerogative . So consider ( yourself ) what command you should give .
( The Queen ) said : No doubt when kings enter a town , they destroy it and disgrace and humiliate its elite citizens . And these ( people ) too will do the same .
And surely I am sending him some gifts and see what reply the messengers bring back .
So when that ( messenger ) came to Sulaiman ( Solomon he ) said ( to him [ i . e . the messenger ] ) : Do you want to help me with wealth , whereas what Allah has given me is better than this ( wealth ) which He has given you ? It is rather you who take pleasure ( and ) pride in your gifts .
So go back to them ( with your gifts ) . We will come with such troops ( to invade ) them they will not have ( the power ) to fight back , and , humiliating them , we shall drive them out from there in such a plight that they will be dishonoured ( becoming prisoners ) .
Sulaiman ( Solomon ) said : O courtiers , which of you can bring me the throne ( of the Queen ) before they come to me in submission ?
One mighty jinn submitted : I can bring it to you before you rise from your seat . And I am indeed energetic ( enough ) and trustworthy ( to bring it ) .
Then the one who had some knowledge of the ( heavenly ) Book submitted : I can bring it to you before your vision turns back to you ( i . e . even before the twinkling of an eye ) . So , when ( Sulaiman [ Solomon ] ) saw it ( the throne ) placed before him , he said : This is by the Grace of my Lord so that He may put me to the test whether I thank ( Him ) or not . And he who thanks ( Allah ) his gratitude is for the good of his own self , and he who is ungrateful surely my Lord is Self - Sufficient , Most Generous .
Sulaiman ( Solomon ) said : ( To test the Queen , ) change the display and appearance of her throne . We shall see whether she gets some clue ( to recognize it ) or proves to be of those who do not have quick reflexes .
Then when she ( the Queen ) came she was asked : Is your throne like this ? She said : It looks as if it is the same and we have already known ( the Truth of Sulaimans [ Solomons ] Prophethood ) and we have become Muslims .
And the ( false god ) she worshipped besides Allah prevented her ( the Queen from accepting the Truth before this ) . No doubt she was of a disbelieving people .
It was said to her ( the Queen ) : Enter the compound of the palace ( beneath which were flowing waves of bluish water ) . So when the Queen saw that ( elegant crystal floor ) she thought it was a deep pool . And ( pulling up her skirt ) she uncovered her lower legs . Sulaiman ( Solomon ) said : This is the compound of the palace paved with crystal slabs . The Queen submitted : O my Lord , ( I was deluded in like manner . ) Surely I wronged my soul . And now along with Sulaiman ( Solomon ) , I submit to Allah , Who is the Lord of all the worlds .
And surely We sent to the people of Thamud their ( kinship ) brother Salih ( as a Messenger : ) Worship Allah . Then they became two parties disputing with each other .
Salih said : O my people , why do you hasten the evil ( i . e . torment ) before the good ( i . e . mercy ) ? Why do you not ask for forgiveness from Allah so that you are shown mercy ?
They said : You have caused us misfortune and so have your companions . ( Salih ) said : ( The cause of ) your misfortune is ( written ) with Allah ; you people have rather been put to trial .
And there were in the city ( of the people of Thamud ) nine prominent leaders ( leading their respective parties ) who used to spread destructive activities in the land and would not do constructive works .
( These leaders ) said : Vow among yourselves by swearing in the Name of Allah that we will certainly launch a murder attack against Salih and his family at night and will then tell their heirs that we were not present on the occasion of their murder . And surely we are telling the truth .
They worked out a plan in secret and We ( also ) devised a secret scheme ( to foil that ) , and they did not get a hint of it .
See then what was the end of their ( wicked ) plan ! Surely We destroyed those ( leaders ) and their entire people altogether .
So these are their houses lying ruined , for they committed oppression and injustice . No doubt there is a Sign ( of Warning ) in it for those who have knowledge .
And We delivered those who believed and became Godfearing .
And ( recall ) Lut ( Lot ) when he said to his people : Do you commit indecency while you see ( as well ) ?
Do you approach men rather than women to satisfy your sexual desire ? The truth is that you are ignorant people .
The only answer of his people was that they said : Drive out the family of Lut ( Lot ) from your town ; they claim to be very pious .
So We delivered Lut ( Lot ) and his family except his wife , for We destined her to be among those who stayed behind ( for torment ) .
And We heavily rained upon them ( stones ) . So evil was the rain ( of stones ) upon those people who were stressed with horror .
Say : All praise be to Allah and peace be upon His Servants whom He has Chosen ( and Exalted ) . Is Allah better or those ( false gods ) that these people associate ( with Him ) ?
Well , Who has created the heavens and the earth and poured down water for you from the atmosphere in the sky ? Then with that ( water ) We brought forth fresh and beautiful gardens . It was not possible for you to grow plants in these ( gardens ) . Is there any ( other ) God besides Allah ? In fact , they are the people who are turning away ( from the path of Truth ) .
Or , Who made the earth a dwelling place and made rivers amid it and made for it huge mountains and put a barrier between the two seas ( of salt and sweet waters ) ? Is there any ( other ) God besides Allah ? But most of these ( disbelievers ) do not have knowledge .
Or , Who grants the supplication of the anxiety - stricken caller when he calls upon Him and Who removes the trouble and makes you successors and inheritors ( of the predecessors ) in the earth ? Is there any ( other ) God besides Allah ? You people accept advice in the least .
Or , Who guides you in the darkness of land and sea and sends winds as good news before ( the rain of ) His Mercy ? Is there any ( other ) God besides Allah ? Exalted is Allah High above ( the false gods ) which they associate with Him .
Well , Who originates creation and shall repeat the same ( process of creation ) and Who grants you sustenance from the heavens and the earth ? Is there any ( other ) God besides Allah ? Say : ( O polytheists , ) bring your proof if you are truthful .
Say : Those who are in the heavens and the earth do not have the knowledge of the unseen ( by themselves ) except Allah ( Who is Self - Knowing ) , nor do they know when they will be raised up ( alive again ) .
The truth is that their knowledge about the Hereafter terminated after reaching ( its ) limit but they are just ( caught ) in doubt about it . Nay , they are blind to its ( exact knowledge ) .
And the disbelievers say : When we and our fathers become dust ( after death ) , shall we be brought forth ( from graves alive ) ?
In fact we and , before this , our ancestors ( too ) have been promised this . These are but stories fabricated by the foregoing people .
Say : Travel in the land and see how was the end of the evildoers .
And , ( O Esteemed Beloved , ) do not grieve ( over what they say ) , nor ( undergo ) distress at the deceitful and treacherous activities which they are carrying out .
And they say : ( Reply ) when this promise ( of the Last Day ) will come true if you are truthful .
Say : It is not far from possible that a part of that ( torment ) which you seek to hasten has nearly reached you .
And surely your Lord is Gracious to the people but most of them do not give thanks .
And certainly your Lord knows well what their breasts hide and also what they make known .
And there is nothing hidden in the heavens and the earth but is recorded in a Clear Book ( al - Lawh al - Mahfuz ) .
Surely this Quran expounds to the Children of Israel most of the things in which they differ .
And verily it is Guidance and Mercy for the believers .
And verily your Lord will judge between these ( believers and disbelievers ) by His Command ( of Justice ) . And He is Almighty , All - Knowing .
So put your trust in Allah . Surely you are ( firm and fixed ) on the Evident Truth .
( O Beloved ! ) Surely you neither make the dead ( i . e . the disbelievers deprived of the vitality of faith ) hear your call nor the deaf ( i . e . deprived of hearing the call of Truth ) while they are getting away ( from you ) turning their backs .
Nor can you guide the blind ( of heart , rescuing them ) from their wrong path . ( In fact ) you make hear only those who ( accepting your call ) believe in Our Revelations . So it is they who are Muslims ( and only they deserve to be called alive ) .
And when the time to execute Our Command ( of torment ) against them comes , We shall bring out for them from the earth a beast who will converse with them because people do not place certitude in Our Signs .
And the Day when We shall gather out of every Umma ( Community ) a party of those who used to reject Our Revelations , they will be stopped ( from the front in order that they all move together ) .
Till when they all reach ( the accountability post ) , it will be said : Did you reject My Revelations ( without meditating on them ) , whereas you could not thoroughly understand them with ( your inadequate ) knowledge ? Or ( tell yourselves ) what else was ( the reason ) that you used to ( belie the Truth ) .
And ( Our ) promise against them has been fulfilled because they continued doing injustice . So they will not be able to say anything ( in reply ) .
Have they not seen that We made the night for them so that they may rest in it and the day sight - giving ( to oversee the affairs of life and to make things visible and perceptible ) . Indeed there are Signs in it for those who believe .
And on the Day when the trumpet is blown , then ( all ) those in the heavens and in the earth will be terrified except those whom Allah pleases ( will not worry ) . And all will appear before His Presence submissively .
And , ( O man , ) you will see the mountains and think them firmly fixed whereas they will be flying like the passing of clouds . ( This ) is the work of Allah , Who has made everything strong and stable ( with Wisdom and Strategy ) . Surely He is Well - Aware of all ( the works ) that you do .
Whoever brings good ( that Day ) , for him ( the reward ) will be better than that and they will be peaceful and secure against terror that Day .
And whoever brings evil shall be thrown prone into the Fire ( of Hell ) . So you will be rewarded only for what you used to do .
( Say to them : ) I have been commanded only to worship the Lord of this city ( Makka ) , Who has made it Holy and Sacred , and everything belongs to Him alone . And I have ( also ) been commanded to be of those who submit wholly ( to Allah ) .
And that I keep reciting the Quran . So whoever accepts Guidance takes the straight path only for his own benefit and ( to him ) who wanders on in error , say : I am only of the Warners .
And say : All praise belongs to Allah alone . Soon He will show you His Signs and you will recognize them . And your Lord is not unaware of what you do .
Ta , Sin , Mim . ( Only Allah and the Messenger [ blessings and peace be upon him ] know the real meaning . )
These are the Verses of the enlightening Book .
( O Esteemed Beloved ! ) We recite to you from the true account of Musa ( Moses ) and Pharaoh for those who have believed .
Certainly Pharaoh had become an arrogant rebel ( i . e . a tyrannical despot ) in the land and he had divided the citizens of his ( state ) into ( various ) sects ( and groups ) . He had oppressed and weakened one of these groups ( the population comprising the Children of Israel ) . He used to kill their sons ( to crush their future strength ) and let their women live ( to increase their number without men and spread immorality and indecency among them ) . Surely he was one of those who rouse disruption .
And We wanted to do favour to the people who had been weakened in the land ( through oppression , exploitation and deprivation of rights and freedom ) and make them leaders ( of the oppressed people ) and inheritors ( of the throne of the kingdom ) .
And to give them governance and power in the land and show Pharaoh and Haman and their armies ( the revolution ) that they used to fear .
And We revealed to the heart of the mother of Musa ( Moses ) : Suckle him on , but when you fear ( for his life ) , put him afloat into the river and be not afraid ( of this situation ) nor grieve . Surely We shall bring him back to you and shall make him one of Our Messengers .
Then Pharaohs family picked him up ( from the river ) so that ( by the will of Allah ) he proves for them an enemy and ( a cause of ) grief . Surely Pharaoh , Haman and their armies were the evildoers .
And the wife of Pharaoh said ( on seeing Musa [ Moses ] ) : ( This child ) is coolness of eyes for me and for you ; do not kill him . He may perhaps bring us benefit or we may adopt him as a son . And they were unaware ( of the outcome of this plan ) .
And the heart of Musas ( Mosess ) mother felt empty ( of patience ) . And she would have nearly disclosed the secret ( owing to her impatience ) , had We not energized her heart with the strength of peace and patience , so that she might remain one of the firm believers ( in Allahs promise ) .
And ( Musas [ Mosess ] mother ) said to his sister : Follow him ( to be aware of him ) . So she watched him from a distance but they were ( completely ) unaware .
And We had in advance prohibited him from the feed of wet nurses . So ( Musas [ Mosess ] sister ) said : Shall I tell you about a family who will bring up this ( child ) for you and will ( also ) be his well - wisher ?
So ( this way ) We returned Musa ( Moses ) to his mother so that her eyes might keep cool and so that she might not feel grieved and in order that she might know ( with certitude ) that Allahs promise is true but most of the people do not know .
And when Musa ( Moses ) reached his maturity and ( the age of ) moderation and stability , We honoured him with the Command ( of Prophethood ) and knowledge and wisdom . And that is how We reward the righteous .
And Musa ( Moses ) entered the city ( in Egypt ) at a time when its people were lying ( asleep ) unaware . There he found two men fighting with each other , one from his ( own ) party ( the Children of Israel ) and the other from his enemies ( the people of Pharaoh ) . The man from his own party asked him for help against the other who was from his enemies . So Musa ( Moses ) struck him with his fist and killed him . ( Then ) he said : This is Satans work ( which I have committed ) ; no doubt he is an open misleading enemy .
( Musa - Moses ) submitted : O my Lord , no doubt I have wronged my soul ; so bless me with forgiveness . Then He forgave him . Surely He is the Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
( Moreover ) he submitted : O my Lord , because of Your favour ( of forgiveness ) You have blessed me with , I shall never be a helper of the wrongdoers .
So Musa ( Moses ) , anxious and afraid , kept waiting till morning ( to discover what would happen next ) . Then suddenly the man who sought his help the day before was crying out to him for help ( again ) . Musa ( Moses ) said to him : Surely you are the one who has truly lost the right path .
Then , when Musa ( Moses ) decided to catch hold of the person who was an enemy to both of them , he exclaimed : O Musa ( Moses ) , do you want to kill me ( too ) as you killed a man the day before ? You intend only to become a tyrant in the land and you do not desire to become one of the reformers .
And a man came running from the far end of the city and said : O Musa ( Moses ) , the chiefs ( of the people of Pharaoh ) are counselling about you to kill you , so depart ( from here ) . Surely I am of your well - wishers .
So Musa ( Moses ) , afraid and waiting for ( Allahs help ) , went off from there . He prayed : O my Lord , deliver me from the oppressing people .
And when he moved towards Madyan , he said : I hope my Lord will show me the straight path ( to take me to the desired destination ) .
And when he arrived at the watering ( well ) of Madyan , he found there a crowd of people watering ( their flocks ) . And on a side he saw two women , withdrawn , holding back ( their goats . Musa [ Moses ] ) asked : Why are you ( standing ) in this condition ? Both said : We cannot water ( our goats ) till the shepherds take back their flocks and our father is an aged man .
So he watered their ( flocks ) and then turned back to the shade and submitted : O Lord , I am in need of whatever good You may send down to me .
Then ( after a while ) one of those two ( girls ) came to him walking modestly . She said : My father invites you so that he may reward you for ( your labour in ) watering ( the flocks ) for us . So when Musa ( Moses ) came to ( Shuaib , the father of those girls , ) and narrated to him ( the preceding ) incidents , he said : Do not fear . You are safe and secure from the oppressive people .
One of those ( girls ) said : O ( my ) respectable father , take him ( into your service ) . Surely the best person you can employ is the one who is strong and trustworthy ( and he is worthy of this assignment ) .
He said ( to Musa - Moses ) : I intend to marry to you one of my two daughters by ( the dower ) that you serve me on hire for eight years but if you complete ten ( years ) , it will be ( a favour ) from you . And I do not want to make it hard for you . If Allah wills you will find me of the pious .
Musa ( Moses ) said : This ( agreement ) is ( settled ) between me and you . Whichever of the two terms I complete , I will not be forced . And Allah is the Custodian over what we say .
So when Musa ( Moses ) completed the appointed term and set out with his wife , he saw a fire in the direction of Tur . ( That was a flash of Absolute Beauty which caught his heart and fascinated him . ) He said to his wife : Stay ( here ) . I have seen a fire . I may bring you some news ( about Him ) from that ( fire in Whose pursuit I have long been wandering ) , or ( I may bring you ) some burning brand from the ( febrile ) fire so that you ( too ) may feel the burn .
When Musa ( Moses ) reached there , a call was made from the right of ( the blessed Tur ) valley from a tree ( located ) in a blessed spot : O Musa ( Moses ) , verily I am Allah , the Sustainer of all the worlds .
And throw your stick ( on the ground ) . So when Musa ( Moses ) saw it moving fast coiling and curling as if it was a snake , he turned his back , jogged off and did not look behind . ( The Voice said : ) O Musa ( Moses ) , come forth and do not fear . Surely you are of the secure .
Put your hand inside your collar opening . It will come out shining white without any disease . And flex your hand close to your ( breast to remove ) fear . These two Signs from your Lord are for ( sending to ) Pharaoh and his courtiers ( to observe ) . Surely they are disobedient people .
Musa ( Moses ) submitted : O Lord , I killed one of them , so I fear they will kill me .
And my brother Harun ( Aaron ) is more communicative and eloquent in speech than I , so send him with me as a helper that he may bear me out . And I ( also ) fear that they will reject me .
( Allah ) said : We shall strengthen your arm with your brother and shall create for both of you dread and dominance ( in the hearts of the people and in the impact of your endeavours ) . So they will not be able to reach you ( to do harm ) because of Our Signs . You two and your followers will triumph and prevail .
So when Musa ( Moses ) came to them with Our clear and enlightening Signs they said : This is nothing but invented magic ; we ( never ) heard of these things among our ancestors .
And Musa ( Moses ) said : My Lord knows best the one who has brought Guidance from Him and ( also ) the one for whom the House of the Hereafter will be the ( best ) end . Surely the wrongdoers will not prosper .
And Pharaoh said : O courtiers , I do not know any god other than me for you . O Haman ! Kindle a fire on clay ( to bake bricks ) for me ; then build me a high tower ( with them . Climbing it , ) I may perhaps have an access to the Lord of Musa ( Moses ) . And I regard him as one of the liars .
And he ( Pharaoh ) himself and his warriors were unjust in the land doing arrogance and defiance and thought they would not be brought back to Us .
So We seized him and his forces ( in the torment ) and threw them into the sea . Observe then how ( terrible ) was the end of the tyrants !
And We made them the leaders ( of the inmates of Hell ) , for they used to invite ( people ) towards Hell . And they will not be given any help on the Day of Resurrection .
And We made a curse to chase them in this world , and on the Day of Resurrection ( as well ) they will be ( counted ) among the miserable .
And surely after ( this scenario that ) We had destroyed the former ( defiant ) communities , We gave Musa ( Moses ) the Book which was ( a rich source of ) vision , guidance and mercy for the people so that they might take advice .
And you were not ( present at that time ) on the western side ( of Tur ) when We sent the Command ( of Prophethood ) towards Musa ( Moses ) , nor were you among ( those seventy people who were ) witnesses ( to the Revelation to Musa [ Moses ] . So what else is this narration except the news of the Unseen ? )
But We raised many generations ( successively after Musa [ Moses ] ) and long ages passed over them . Nor were you living among the people of Madyan ( like Musa - Moses and Shuaib ) reciting Our Verses to them . But it is for Us to send ( you exalting with tidings of the Unseen ) .
And nor were you ( present at that time ) on the side of Tur when We called out Musa ( Moses ) . But ( enlightening you on all these matters of the Unseen ) is an ( exceptional ) Mercy from your Lord so that ( having awareness of these incidents ) you may warn these people ( of the torment of Allah ) to whom no Warner has come before you , in order that they may accept admonition .
And ( We would not send any Messenger ) if this was not the case that when some suffering should seize them due to their own evil deeds which they did , they would say : O our Lord , why did You not send us any Messenger so that we might follow Your Revelations and become of the believers ?
Then when the Truth came to them from Our Presence , they said : Why has this ( Messenger ) not been given the ( Signs ) like those ( Signs ) which were given to Musa ( Moses ) ? Did they not deny those ( Signs ) which were given to Musa ( Moses ) before this ? They said : Both ( the Quran as well as the Torah ) are magic ( which ) confirm and agree with each other . And they said : We deny all ( of them ) .
Say : Bring some ( other ) book from Allah which guides better than these two , ( then ) I shall follow that if you are truthful ( in your blames ) .
But if they do not accept what you say then know that ( they do not have any logic ) ; they merely follow their lusts . And who can be more astray than the one who follows his desire abandoning the Guidance from Allah ? Surely Allah does not guide the wrongdoers .
In fact We kept sending for them successive commands ( of the Quran ) so that they might take direction and guidance .
Those whom We gave the Book before this they believe in this ( Quran as well in the continuation of the same guidance ) .
And when ( the Quran ) is recited to them , they say : We believe in it ; verily , it is the Truth from our Lord . In fact We had become Muslims ( i . e . the yielding ) even before this .
It is these people who will be given their reward twice because they remained steadfast and fend off evil with good and they spend in Our Way out of the Bounty We bestowed upon them .
And when they hear anything absurd they turn away from it and say : For us are our deeds and for you are your deeds . Peace be upon you . We do not want ( to adopt the mentality and conduct of ) the ignorant . ( Why should we give up our good for the sake of their evil ? )
The truth is that whoever you like ( to bring on to the path of guidance ) you do not yourself bring him on to the path of guidance . Instead , ( it so happens that ) whoever Allah pleases He makes him tread the path of guidance ( through your mediation ) . And He knows best those who find the path of guidance .
And ( the ignorant of its value ) say : If we follow the guidance in your company , we will be snatched out of our land . Have We not made them settle in ( this ) secure and peaceful Sanctuary ( Makka - your own land ) where all kinds of fruits are supplied ( from all over the world ) as sustenance from Us ? But most of them do not know ( for whose sake this whole process operates ) .
And how many towns have We destroyed that became arrogant and ungrateful on account of their prosperous economies ! So here are their ( ruined ) houses that have been inhabited after them but little . And We alone are the inheritors and owners ( in the end ) .
And your Lord does not destroy the towns until He sends to their capital city a Messenger who recites to them Our Verses . And We do not destroy towns unless their dwellers are given to oppression .
And whatever you have been given are but provisions of the worldly life , its charms and beauty . But what is ( yet ) with Allah is far better ( than this ) and eternal . Do you not understand ( this fact ) ?
Can he to whom We have made an excellent promise ( pertaining to Hereafter ) and who becomes one to attain to it be like the ( ill - fated ) one We have given the good things of worldly life then ( owing to ingratitude for the bounties ) becomes of those who will be brought forth on the Last Day ( for punishment ) ?
And the Day when ( Allah ) will call them and say : Where are those that you regarded as My partners and considered them ( gods ) ?
The people against whom the Command ( of torment ) has been proved will say : O our Lord , it is these people who we misguided . We led them astray ( the same way ) as we ( ourselves ) lost the right path . We turn to You showing our disgust towards them and ( in fact ) they did not worship us . ( They rather worshipped their lusts . )
And it will be said ( to them ) : Call your ( self - made ) partners . So they will call them but they ( partners ) will not respond to them and those people will see the torment . Would that they had taken guidance ( in the world ) !
And the Day when ( Allah ) will call to them He will say : What answer did you serve to the Messengers ?
On that Day all information will become unknown to them and they will not be able to ask ( even ) one another .
But whoever repents and believes and does pious deeds will surely be of those who are successful .
And your Lord creates whatever He wills and chooses ( whom He pleases for Prophethood and for the right of intercession ) . These ( disbelievers and polytheists ) have no authority or choice ( in this matter ) . Holy is Allah the Glorious and Exalted far above ( the false gods ) that they associate as partners ( with Allah ) !
And your Lord knows ( all ) what their breasts hide ( inside ) and what they make known .
And He alone is Allah ; apart from Him there is no God . All praise belongs to Him in the world and in the Hereafter . And His alone is the ( true ) Command and Rule and to Him alone will you be returned .
Say : Just answer : If Allah prolongs the night over you till the Day of Resurrection ( then ) what god is there besides Allah who will bring you light ? Do you not hear ( these words ) ?
Say : Just tell me this ( as well ) : If Allah prolongs the day over you till the Day of Judgment , ( then ) what god is there besides Allah who will bring you night in which you may take rest ? Do you not see ?
And it is out of His Mercy that He has made night and day for you so that at night you may take rest and ( during the day ) you may seek His Bounty ( sustenance ) and so that you may become grateful .
And the Day when He will call to them and say : Where are they who you regarded as My partners and considered ( gods ) ?
And We shall take out from every Umma ( Community ) a witness and We shall then say ( to the disbelievers ) : Bring your proof . Then they will know that the Truth belongs to Allah and all ( the lies ) they used to invent will disappear from them .
No doubt Qarun ( Korah ) was of the people of Musa ( Moses ) but he oppressed them . And We gave him so much of treasures that it was hard for a powerful party of strong men to ( carry ) his keys while his people said to him : Do not be arrogant and conceited ( out of rejoicing ) . Verily Allah does not like those who gloat .
And seek the home of the Hereafter with what ( wealth ) Allah has given you and ( also ) do not forget your share of the world . And do ( such ) good ( to the people ) as Allah has done good to you . But do not look for ( ways to spread ) evil and terror in the land ( through oppression , accumulation of wealth and exploitation ) . Surely Allah does not like those who violate peace .
He said : ( Why should I spend this capital for the good of people and society ? ) This wealth has been given to me only on the basis of ( the professional ) knowledge and skill I possess . Did he not know that Allah had really destroyed before him many communities who were far stronger than him in might and far ahead in accumulating ( wealth and manpower ) ? And the culprits will not be asked ( for fact - finding or any excuse or reason ) about their sins ( at the time of destruction ) .
Then he went forth before his people ( fully ) adorned and ornamented . ( Seeing his apparent pomp and show ) those who were desirous of worldly life could not help saying : Would that there were such ( affluence and riches ) for us ( as well ) as Qarun ( Korah ) has been given ! Surely he has mighty fortune .
And ( on the other side ) those who had been granted knowledge ( of the Truth ) said : Woe to you ! Allahs reward is ( far ) better ( than this wealth and adornment ) for him who has believed and is committed to pious deeds . But this ( reward and compensation ) will not be given except to those who keep patience .
Then We sank him ( Qarun [ Korah ] ) and his house into the earth . So except Allah there was no ( such ) party that could help him ( in saving from the torment ) . Nor could he stop the torment himself .
And those who were longing for his position and prominence the day before said ( feeling sorry and regretful ) : How amazing ! Allah gives abundantly to whom He wills and sparingly ( to whom He wills ) of His servants . Had not Allah done favour to us , He would have sunk us ( too ) . Ah ! ( It is now understood ) that the disbelievers cannot attain to deliverance .
( This ) is the Home of the Hereafter We have made for such people that neither seek violence and vanity nor mischief in the land . And good end is for the God - fearing .
Whoever brings good , for him is reward better than that and whoever brings evil , then there is no compensation for the evildoers but equal to what they used to do .
Surely the ( Lord ) Who has enjoined ( the teaching , preaching and establishment of the system given in ) the Quran upon you , He will bring you back ( according to your desire ) to the place of return ( Makka or the Hereafter with victory and success ) . Say : My Lord knows best the one who brought Guidance and ( also ) the one who is in open error .
( The Muslim Umma [ Community ] is addressed through the Prophet , blessings and peace be upon him : ) And you did not expect that this ( Book ) shall be revealed to you , but it is ( revealed by ) the Mercy of your Lord . So never be a helper of the disbelievers .
And never let these ( disbelievers ) turn you away from ( implementing and preaching of ) the Revelations of Allah after they have been sent down to you . And keep calling ( the people ) towards your Lord , and never become of those who associate partners with Allah .
And never call any other ( self - made ) god besides Allah . None has the right to be worshipped except He . Everything has to perish but He . His is the Command and to Him you ( all ) will be returned .
Alif , Lam , Mim . ( Only Allah and the Messenger [ blessings and peace be upon him ] know the real meaning . )
Do people think that they will be released ( just ) on saying : We have believed , and they will not be tried ?
And surely We tried ( also ) those who were before them . Certainly Allah shall make them prominent ( through trial ) who are truthful ( in claiming belief ) , and shall make known the liars ( as well ) .
Do the evildoers think that they will slip away from Our ( grip ) ? How evil is what they decide ( in their minds ) !
Whoever hopes for meeting with Allah , then Allahs appointed time is bound to come . And He alone is All - Hearing , All - Knowing .
Whoever strives hard ( for the cause of Truth ) strives for his own ( benefit ) . Surely Allah is independent of ( the obedience , submission , toils and struggles ) of all the worlds .
And those who believe and do pious deeds , We shall remove all their misdeeds from their ( record ) and shall certainly give them reward better than the deeds which they will have ( actually ) accomplished .
And We have enjoined upon man to behave benevolently with his parents . And if they struggle with you to make you associate with Me what you have no knowledge of , then do not obey them . To Me you ( all ) have to return . So I shall inform you of ( the deeds ) which you used to do ( in the world ) .
And those who believe and do pious deeds then We shall certainly admit them to the ( group ) of the most pious .
And there are ( also ) those among the people who ( verbally ) say : We believe in Allah , but when they are put to ( some ) trouble in the way of Allah , they consider the trial of the people not unlike punishment from Allah . And if some help comes from your Lord , then indeed they start saying : We were with you . Is Allah not best aware of those ( things ) which are ( hidden ) in the breasts of all the people of the world ?
And surely Allah will distinguish those who have believed ( with true hearts ) and will certainly expose the hypocrites ( too ) .
And the disbelievers say to the believers : Follow our way and we shall bear ( the burden of ) your sins , whereas they will not bear any ( burden ) of their sins . Surely they are liars .
They will certainly carry their own burdens ( of sins ) and ( will also have loaded ) many ( other ) burdens ( over themselves ) along with their own burdens . And they will certainly be interrogated on the Day of Resurrection about those ( false allegations ) which they used to invent .
And indeed We sent Nuh ( Noah ) to his people . He lived among them for a millennium less fifty years . Then the Great Flood ( Deluge ) seized them while they were wrongdoers .
Then We delivered Nuh ( Noah ) and those ( with him ) in the Ark , and made that ( Ark and the incident ) a Sign for the people of the world .
And ( remember ) Ibrahim ( Abraham ) when he said to his people : Worship Allah and fear Him . That is better for you if you know ( the reality ) .
You worship idols besides Allah and fabricate mere lies . Surely those you worship instead of Allah are not masters of your sustenance . So always seek sustenance from Allah , and worship Him alone , and submit thanks to Him . You will be returned to Him alone .
And if you reject ( my words ) then no doubt many generations have rejected ( the Truth ) before as well . And nothing is ( obligatory ) upon the Messenger but to convey ( the Commandments ) in a clear way .
Have they not seen ( i . e . pondered ) how Allah originates creation , then repeats it ( the same way ) ? Surely this ( work ) is easy for Allah .
Say : Travel in the land ( to study life in the universe ) , then observe ( i . e . meditate and research ) as to how He initiated ( life of ) Creation and how He raises and nourishes second life ( passing it through evolutionary stages ) . Surely Allah has Perfect Power over all things .
He torments whom He wills and shows Mercy to whom He pleases . And to Him will you be returned .
And you can escape ( from Allah ) neither in the earth nor in the heavens , and nor is there for you any guardian or helper except Allah .
And those who reject Allahs Revelations and deny meeting with Him , they despair of My Mercy . And it is they for whom there is painful punishment .
So the People of Ibrahim ( Abraham ) had no answer except that they said : Kill him or burn him . Then Allah delivered him from the fire ( of Nimrod ) . Surely there are Signs in this incident for those who have believed .
And Ibrahim ( Abraham ) said : You have taken up the worship of idols leaving Allah merely for the sake of mutual friendship in the life of this world . Then on the Day of Resurrection ( each ) one of you will deny ( the friendship of ) the other and ( each ) one of you will curse the other . Hell is your abode and there will be no helper for you .
Then Lut ( Lot ) believed in him ( Ibrahim [ Abraham ] ) and he said : I am migrating towards my Lord . Surely He is Almighty , Most Wise .
And We blessed him with Ishaq ( Isaac ) and Yaqub ( [ Jacob ] a son and a grandson ) and We ordained Prophethood and the Book in Ibrahims descendants . And We gave him his reward ( here ) in this world and surely he is among the most pious in the Hereafter ( as well ) .
And ( remember ) Lut ( Lot ) when he said to his people : Surely you commit the worst indecency . None of the nations in the whole world has ever committed this ( indecency ) before you .
Do you approach men ( for your sexual desire ) and commit highway robberies and do indecent deeds in your ( crowded ) meetings ? And his people ( also ) had no answer except that they said : Bring upon us Allahs torment if you are truthful .
Lut ( Lot ) submitted : O Lord ! Help me against the mischief mongers .
And when Our messengers ( angels ) came to Ibrahim ( Abraham ) with good news ( then , adding ) they ( also ) said : We are going to destroy the dwellers of this town because its inhabitants are the wrongdoers .
Ibrahim ( Abraham ) said : Lut ( Lot ) is ( also ) here in this ( town ) . They said : We know very well the people who ( live ) in it . We shall certainly save Lut ( Lot ) and his family except his wife . She is of those who remain behind .
And when Our messengers ( angels ) came to Lut ( Lot ) , he felt distressed ( on their arrival ) and felt depressed for their ( intention to torment ) . And ( the messengers ) said : Do not feel afraid or grieved . We shall no doubt save you and your family except your wife . She is of those who will remain behind ( for torment ) .
Surely we are about to bring down from the heaven torment for the inhabitants of this town because they used to disobey .
And verily We sustained ( the ruined houses ) of this town as a clear Sign for the wise .
And ( We sent ) to Madyan their ( kinship ) brother Shuaib . So he said : O my people , worship Allah and look forward to the Last Day and do not do mischief in the land .
Then they rejected Shuaib . So ( the torment of ) earthquake seized them ( as well ) and at dawn they were lying prone in their houses ( dead ) .
And ( We destroyed ) Ad and Thamud ( as well ) . And indeed ( ruins of ) some of their houses stand out ( have lived to tell the tale ) for you ( as a lesson of warning ) . And Satan made their evil deeds look charming to them and turned them away from the path ( of Truth ) though they were vigilant and wise .
And ( We also destroyed ) Qarun ( Korah ) , Pharaoh and Haman . And surely Musa ( Moses ) brought to them clear Signs and they were arrogant and violent in the land but could not escape ( Our seizure ) .
So We seized ( everyone of ) them for his sin . And there was ( a faction ) of those against whom We sent a storm of pelting stones . And of them was ( also a group ) whom a roaring blast seized . And ( a party ) of them were such whom We sank into the earth . And of them there was ( yet another community ) that We drowned . And Allah would never have wronged them , but they themselves wronged their own souls .
The example of those ( disbelievers ) who have taken others ( i . e . idols ) as guardians instead of Allah is like the story of a spider who builds ( for herself ) a house ( of cobweb ) . And no doubt the weakest of all houses is the spiders house . Would that they knew it !
Surely Allah knows ( the truth of the idols ) that they worship instead of Him and He alone is Almighty , Most Wise .
And these are the examples which We explain for the people ( to understand ) , and none understands them except those who have knowledge .
Allah has created the heavens and the earth with a zero - defect strategy . Surely there is in this ( Creation ) a Sign ( of His Oneness and Might ) for those who believe .
( O Esteemed Beloved ! ) Recite that Book which has been revealed to you and establish Prayer . Surely Prayer prohibits indecency and impiety ; and verily the remembrance of Allah is the greatest . And Allah knows whatever ( deeds ) you do .
And , ( O Believers , ) do not argue with the People of the Book but in a suitable and decent way , except those of them who did injustice . And say ( to them ) : We believe in that ( Book ) which has been revealed to us and which was sent down to you and our God and your God is but One and we obey Him alone .
And in like manner We revealed the Book to you . And those ( gnostics of the Truth ) whom We had given the Book ( already ) believe in this ( Book ) . And of these ( inhabitants of Makka too ) there are those who believe in it . And none but the disbelievers deny Our Revelations .
And , ( O Beloved , ) you never recited any book before this , nor did you write it with your own hand in which case the disbelievers would certainly have doubted .
But these are the clear verses ( of the Quran ) that are ( preserved ) in the breasts of those who have been given ( true ) knowledge . And none other than the unjust deny Our Revelations .
And the disbelievers say : Why have Signs not been sent down on him ( the Holy Prophet [ blessings and peace be upon him ] ) from his Lord ? Say : The Signs are with Allah alone and I am simply an open Warner .
Is this ( Sign ) not enough for them that We have revealed to you ( that ) Book which is recited to them ( or will always be recited ) ? Surely in this ( Book ) there is mercy and direction and guidance for the believers .
Say : Sufficient is Allah as a Witness between me and you . He knows ( the state of ) all that is in the heavens and in the earth . And those who believe in falsehood and disbelieve in Allah , it is they who are the losers .
And they want you to hasten the torment . And had the time ( of the torment ) not been fixed , the torment would have overtaken them . And that ( torment , or the time of the torment , ) shall certainly come upon them all of a sudden and they will not be aware ( of it ) .
They seek the torment from you in haste and surely Hell is about to besiege the disbelievers .
The Day when the torment wraps them from above them and from beneath their feet Allah will say : Savour the taste of works you used to perform .
O My servants who have believed ! Surely My earth is vast , so worship Me alone .
Every soul is to taste death and then to Us you shall be returned .
And those who believe and persevere with right actions We shall certainly house them in the upper palaces of Paradise with streams flowing beneath them ; they will live there forever . What an excellent reward for those who do ( constructive ) works !
( These are the people ) who remain steadfast and always trust their Lord alone .
And many an animal there is that does not carry its sustenance ( with it ) ! Allah provides for them and for you too . And He is All - Hearing , All - Knowing .
And if you ask these ( disbelievers ) : Who created the heavens and the earth and made the sun and the moon law - abiding ? they shall certainly say : Allah . Then where are they turning away ?
Allah increases sustenance for whom He pleases of His servants and restrains for whom He wills . Surely Allah knows everything full well .
And if you ask them : Who sends down water from the sky , then gives life ( and freshness ) to the earth after its death ? they will surely say : Allah . Say : All praise belongs to Allah alone . But most of them do not have sense .
And , ( O people , ) the life of this world is nothing but sport and pastime and the Home of the Hereafter is the only ( true ) life . Would that they knew ( this secret ) !
When they board a vessel they ( abandon the idols in hard time and ) call upon Allah alone , making their Din ( faith and devotion ) sincerely ( and purely ) for Him . Then , when Allah rescues and brings them safe to the land , they start setting up partners with Him ( again ) .
So that they may show ingratitude towards that ( favour of deliverance ) which We granted them and enjoy ( the unlawful ) benefits ( of the life of disbelief ) . But soon they shall know ( their fate ) .
And have they not seen that We have made the Sanctuary ( of the Kaba ) a safe haven while people are abducted from all around them ? Do they ( still ) believe in falsehood and will they continue disregarding the favour of Allah ?
And who can be more unjust than someone who fabricates a lie concerning Allah or belies the Truth when it comes to him ? Is there not an apartment in Hell ( appointed ) for the disbelievers ?
And those who toil hard ( and fight the lower self vehemently ) for Our cause We certainly guide them in Our Ways ( of striving for and attaining to the gnosis sayr and wusul ) , and verily Allah blesses the men of spiritual excellence with His companionship .
Alif , Lam , Mim . ( Only Allah and the Messenger [ blessings and peace be upon him ] know the real meaning . )
The Romans have been overpowered ( by Persia ) .
In the land nearby . And after their defeat they will soon gain victory .
In a few years ( i . e . in less than a decade ) . The Command is but Allahs both before ( in the Persian dominance ) and afterwards too ( in the Roman dominance ) . And the believers will rejoice on that day .
With the help of Allah . He helps whom He wills and He is Almighty , Ever - Merciful .
( This ) is the Promise of Allah . Allah does not go against His promise but most people do not know .
They know only the visible worldly life and they are neglectful and unaware of ( the real life of ) the Hereafter .
Have they not meditated within themselves that Allah has not created the heavens and the earth and whatever is between the two except with ( a system of ) Truth and for ( a span of ) fixed term ? And surely most of the people do not believe in the meeting with their Lord .
Have they not travelled in the earth and seen what was the end of those before them ? They were more powerful than them . And they cultivated the earth and inhabited it far more than these people have done . Then their Messengers came to them with clear Signs . So Allah would not wrong them but they wronged their souls themselves .
Then much evil came to be the end of those who did evil because they used to belie the Revelations of Allah and used to ridicule them .
Allah generates creation the first time , then ( He is the One Who ) will create it the second time , then to Him you will be returned .
And the Day when the Last Hour is established , the evildoers will lose hope .
And none of their ( self - made ) partners will intercede for them , and ( ultimately ) they will deny their very same partners .
And the Day when the Last Hour will be established , people will separate from one another ( in personal agony ) .
So those who believe and always do pious deeds will be pleased and delighted in the Gardens of Paradise .
And those who disbelieve and belie Our Revelations and the Meeting of the Last Day , it is they who will be brought forth to the torment .
So glorify Allah when you enter the evening ( Maghrib and Isha times ) and when you enter the morning ( Fajr time ) .
And all praise in the heavens and the earth be to Him alone and ( glorify Him ) in the afternoon ( Asr time ) and at noon ( Zuhr time ) as well .
He is the One Who brings forth the living from the dead and brings forth the dead from the living and enlivens and freshens the earth after its death and you ( too ) will be brought forth ( from the graves ) the same way .
And of His Signs is that He created you from dust , then now you are human beings spread around ( all over the globe ) .
And ( also ) of His Signs is that He created for you mates of your own kind so that you acquire peace from them , and He created between you love and mercy . Verily in this ( system of creation ) there are Signs for those who meditate .
And of His Signs ( too ) is the creation of the heavens and the earth and ( also ) the diversity of your tongues and colours . Verily in that are Signs for the men of knowledge ( and research ) .
And ( also ) of His Signs is your sleep by night and by day and your looking for His Bounty ( sustenance ) . Verily there are Signs in it for the ( active ) listeners .
And among His Signs ( as well ) is that He shows you lightning to make you fear and hope and pours ( rain ) water from the sky . Then with that He brings the earth back to life and liveliness after it dies . Verily there are Signs in it for those who put their mind to work .
And ( also ) of His Signs is that the heavens and the earth stand firm by His ( system of ) Command . Then when He will give you one call to come ( forth ) from the earth , at once you will come ( forth ) .
And whatever is in the heavens and the earth ( all ) belongs to Him alone . All are obedient and submissive to Him alone .
And He is the One Who originates creation , then will regenerate it and this ( recreation ) is very easy for Him . His is the highest Glory in the heavens and the earth and He is Almighty , Most Wise .
( To bring home the point of the Oneness of God ) He has illustrated an example for you from your personal lives : Are those ( slaves / slave girls ) , whom you possess , your partners in the wealth which We have given you , that you ( all ) become equal sharers ( owners ? Moreover , do ) you fear them as you fear one another ? ( No , ) We explain the Signs expressly in the same way for those who possess wisdom ( that there is no partner of Allah also in His Creation ) .
But those who have done injustice follow the desires of their ( ill - commanding ) selves without any knowledge ( and guidance ) . So who can guide him whom Allah has held astray ? And there are no helpers for them .
So set your face with absolute concentration ( and single - minded devotion ) to the obedience of Allah . The nature ( made ) by Allah is ( Islam ) on which He has created mankind ; ( Adopt it . The instinct ) created by Allah will never be changed . This Din ( Religion ) is straight but most people do not know ( these realities ) .
Have your mind set in turning towards Him alone in repentance and remorse and fear Him and establish Prayer and be not of the polytheists .
( Be not also ) of those ( Jews and Christians ) who disintegrated their religion and became sects and subsectsevery sect rejoices over what is with them .
And when suffering afflicts people they call upon their Lord turning towards Him , but when He delights them with the taste of Mercy from Him then some of them straight away start setting up partners with their Lord .
To show ingratitude for the Bounty which We have given them . So enjoy benefits ( of a few days life ) , then soon you will know ( your end ) .
Have We sent down to them any ( such ) authority that speaks as a witness in favour of these idols they associate as partners with Allah ?
And when We delight people with the taste of Mercy they cheer up with that , and when some suffering touches them due to the sins they have already perpetrated they lose hope at once .
Have they not seen that Allah releases sustenance in abundance for whom He wills and restrains it ( for whom He likes ) ? Surely there are Signs in it for those who believe .
So keep giving to the close relative his due and to the needy and the wayfarers ( their due ) . That is best for those who seek the pleasure of Allah and it is they who will achieve the goal .
And the money that you lend at usury so that ( your wealth ) may increase through mingling with other peoples money will not increase with Allah , but the money that you give as Zakat ( [ the obligatory Alms - due ] and charity donations ) , seeking ( solely ) Allahs pleasureso it is they who multiply ( their money with Allah ) manifold .
Allah is the One Who created you , then granted you sustenance , then causes you to die and then will bring you back to life . Is there any of your ( self - made ) partners who may do any of these ( works ) ? Holy is He ( Allah ) the Glorious , the Transcendent , far above these things which they associate as partners ( with Him ) .
Corruption and disorder has spread over land and sea on account of ( the sins ) which people have earned with their hands so that Allah may make them taste the outcome of some of their ( evil ) deeds that they have committed in order that they may desist .
Say : Travel in the land then see how ( alarming ) was the end of the people before you . Most of them were polytheists .
So set your ( radiant ) face to the straight Din ( Religion ) before that Day comes from Allah which will not avert ( at all ) . On that Day people will separate from one another .
Whoever disbelieves will himself face the ( evil consequences ) of disbelief , while those who act piously are setting aright for themselves the places of rest ( in Paradise ) .
So that Allah rewards out of His Bounty those who believe and do good deeds . Surely He does not take the disbelievers for friends .
And ( also ) of His Signs it is that He sends winds that bring glad tidings ( of rain ) , so that He may bless you with His Mercy ( in the shape of the results of rain ) and that the ships may ( also ) sail with His Command ( by means of these winds ) . And ( all this ) is because you may seek His bounty ( in the form of agriculture and business ) and you may ( thus ) become thankful .
And in fact We sent before you Prophets to their respective peoples and they came to them with clear Signs . Then We took revenge on the wicked ( who belied and disbelieved ) , and to help the believers was ( and is ) a binding obligation upon Our Grace .
Allah is the One Who sends the winds and they raise the clouds . Then He spreads this ( cloud ) in the atmosphere in the sky as He likes . Then He breaks it up into ( various ) pieces ( layer upon layer ) . Then you see the rain pouring down from its midst . Then , when He sends it to those of His servants whom He pleases , they become instantly cheerful .
Although they were in despair before the rainfall upon them .
So see the effects of Allahs Mercy how He gives life to the earth after its death . Surely He will bring the dead ( also ) back to life ( in the same way ) and He is All - Powerful over everything .
And if We send a dry wind and they see ( their ) crops turning yellow , then after this they will start denying ( all the earlier favours ) .
( O Beloved ! ) Surely you neither make the dead ( i . e . the disbelievers deprived of the vitality of faith ) hear your call nor the deaf ( i . e . deprived of hearing the call of Truth ) while they are getting away ( from you ) turning their backs .
Nor can you turn ( these ) blind ( wanting in insight ) from misguidance to the path of guidance . You recite ( with the essential understanding and competence of acceptability ) only to those people who believe in Our Revelations . So it is they who are Muslims . ( You recite to none except them . )
Allah is the One Who created you from a weak thing ( i . e . a sperm drop ) . Then after weakness He generated strength ( of youth ) . Then after strength He produced debility and senility . He creates what He wills ; and He is All - Knowing , All - Powerful .
And the Day when the Last Hour is established , the evildoers will swear they did not stay ( in the world ) for more than an hour . They used to turn back ( from Truth ) in the same manner ( in the world as well ) .
And those blessed with knowledge and faith will say ( to them ) : Indeed , according to the Book of Allah , you have stayed till the Day of Resurrection ( instead of one hour ) . So this is the Day of Resurrection but you did not know it .
So on that Day the excuse of the wrongdoers will not be of any benefit to them , nor will they be asked to please ( Allah ) .
And in truth We have elucidated every type of example in this Quran for the people ( to make them understand ) . And if you bring to them some ( visible ) Sign even then these disbelieving people will certainly say : You are doing only falsehood and fraud .
That is how Allah seals the hearts of the people who do not know ( the Truth ) .
So be steadfast . Verily the Promise of Allah is true . Let not those who lack certitude of faith enfeeble you ( on account of the grief over their straying and discomfort for their guidance . O life of the universe , let not their disbelief become a grief consuming your soul ) .
Alif , Lam , Mim . ( Only Allah and the Messenger [ blessings and peace be upon him ] know the real meaning . )
These are verses of the Book of Wisdom .
Guidance and mercy for the pious .
Who establish Prayer and pay Zakat ( the Alms - due ) and those who believe in the Hereafter .
It is they who are following guidance from their Lord and it is they who will prosper .
And of people there are those who buy absurd narrations to make the people lacking in knowledge lose the path of Allah and to mock this ( path ) . It is they for whom there is painful torment .
And when Our Revelations are recited to such a one , he turns his face away showing arrogance as though he had not heard it at all , as if there were weight ( of deafness ) in his ears . So give him the news of an agonizing torment .
Undoubtedly those who believe and keep doing good deeds , for them are Gardens of Bliss .
( They ) will live in them forever . The Promise of Allah is true . And He is Almighty , Most Wise .
He created the heavens without pillars ( as ) you see them and He placed firm mountains in the earth so that it might not quake carrying you ( during rotation ) and He spread in it all kinds of animals . And We sent down water from the heaven and We caused to grow in it all kinds of fine and useful vegetation .
This is Allahs Creation . So , ( O polytheists , ) show Me what others , apart from Allah , have created . In truth , the wrongdoers are in open error .
And surely We blessed Luqman with wisdom and sound judgment ( and said to him : ) Be grateful to Allah . And whoever gives thanks , thanks for his own good and whoever attempts ingratitude then surely Allah is Self - Sufficient , ( Himself ) Worthy of all praise .
And ( recall ) when Luqman said to his son , and he was advising him : O my son , do not set up partners with Allah . Verily associating partners with Allah is a very grave injustice .
And We enjoined upon man emphatically ( to do good ) in relation to his parents whose mother bore him ( in her reproductive system ) in pain after pain , and whose weaning also takes two years ( and commanded him : ) Give thanks to Me and to your parents . ( You ) have to return to Me alone .
And if both of them struggle with you to make you associate with Me as partner something whose ( reality ) you simply do not know , then do not obey them . And cooperate with them in worldly affairs in a decent manner . But ( in the matter of faith and the Last Hour and the related affairs ) follow someone who adopts the path of turning to Me in repentance and submitting to My injunctions . Then you are to return to Me alone . So I will inform you about the works that you used to do .
( Luqman said : ) O my son , if there is a thing equal to the grain of a mustard seed ( hidden ) inside a rock or in the heavens or in the earth , ( even then ) Allah will bring it forth ( for reckoning on the Day of Judgment ) . Surely Allah is the Subtle Knower of the minutest matters , All - Aware and Most Vigilant ( as well ) .
O my son ! Establish Prayer and enjoin good and forbid evil , and patiently endure every suffering that touches you . Verily , these are matters of great courage and high resolve .
And do not turn your face away from the people ( in arrogance ) nor walk haughtily on earth . Surely Allah does not love anyone arrogant walking gloatingly in self - conceit .
And adopt moderation while walking and keep your voice low . Surely the worst voice is the bray of a donkey .
( O people ! ) Have you not seen that Allah has subjected to you whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth , and He has completed upon you His blessings outwardly as well as inwardly ? And among people there are ( also ) those who dispute about Allah without knowledge and without guidance and without ( any evidence from ) the enlightening Book .
And when it is said to them : Follow this Book which Allah has revealed , they say : Nay , we shall follow ( that ) way which we found our fathers following , even though Satan should be inviting them to the torment of Hell .
And whoever bows his face in obedience to Allah and is also a man of spiritual excellence ( in action and state of mind ) , has firmly grasped a strong handhold . And the end of all deeds returns to Allah alone .
And whoever disbelieves , ( O Esteemed Beloved , ) let not his disbelief grieve you . They ( too ) are to return to Us . We shall inform them of the deeds which they used to do . Surely Allah knows best the ( hidden ) contents of the breasts .
We shall provide them a little benefit ( in the world ) then , making them helpless , We shall drive them towards the severe torment .
And if you ask them : Who created the heavens and the earth ? they shall answer : Allah . Say : All praise belongs to Allah alone . But most of them do not know .
Whatever is in the heavens and the earth ( all ) belongs to Allah alone . Surely Allah is Self - Sufficient , Worthy of all praise ( by Himself ) .
If ( all ) the trees on earth were pens and the ocean reinforced by seven more oceans was ink , even then the Words of Allah would never be exhausted . Surely Allah is Almighty , Most Wise .
Creating you all and raising you all ( after death ) is ( for Allahs Power ) like ( creating and raising ) a single person . Surely Allah is All - Hearing , All - Seeing .
Have you not seen that Allah makes the night pass into the day and makes the day pass into the night ; And ( He is the One Who ) has made the sun and the moon subservient , each rotating for an appointed term and that Allah is Aware of ( all ) the deeds that you do ?
That is because Allah alone is the Truth and those whom these people worship besides Allah are false and that Allah is Most High , the Supreme .
Have you not seen that vessels sail on the sea by Allahs Bounty so that He shows you some of His Signs ? Surely there are Signs in it for every greatly steadfast and grateful person .
And when the sea wave engulfs them like ( clouds or towering mountains or ) canopies they ( the disbelievers and polytheists ) start calling upon Allah , dedicating their most sincere devotion to Him alone . But when rescuing them He brings them back to land , then only a few of them remain on the moderate path ( i . e . the path of guidance ) . And none but every deceptive and ungrateful person denies Our Signs .
O people ! Fear your Lord and fear that Day when no father will be able to expiate for his son , nor will a son be able to atone for his father . Surely true is the Promise of Allah . So let not the worldly life deceive you nor let the Arch - Deceiver ( Satan ) deceive you concerning Allah .
Surely Allah is the One with Whom is the knowledge of the Last Hour . And He is the One Who sends down rain and knows whatever is in the wombs . And no one knows what ( deed ) he will earn the next day nor does any one know in what land he will die . Surely Allah is All - Knowing , All - Aware ( i . e . Self - Knowing and fully Aware of everything besides Him . He Himself Knows everything and also informs him whom He likes ) .
Alif , Lam , Mim . ( Only Allah and the Messenger [ blessings and peace be upon him ] know the real meaning . )
There is not even an iota of doubt in it that sending down of this Book is from the Lord of all the worlds .
Do the disbelievers and the polytheists say this : He ( the Holy Prophet ) has fabricated it ? Nay , it is the Truth from your Lord so that you may warn those to whom no Warner has come before you that they may receive guidance .
Allah is He Who created the heavens and the earth and whatever is between them in six days ( i . e . six phases ) . He then settled Himself on the Throne ( the Command and Control System of universe , befitting His Glory ) . You have no helper or intercessor apart from Him . So do you not accept direction and guidance ?
He plans and executes the Command and Control System from the heavens to the earth . Then His Command ascends ( and will ascend to completion ) towards Him in one Day which measures one thousand years according to ( the number ) that you count .
He is the One Who knows the unseen and the visible , Almighty and Ever - Merciful .
He is the One Who endowed everything He created with perfection and virtue . And He initiated the genesis of man from clay ( i . e . inorganic matter ) .
Then He linked up lineage of his kind from the extract of a lowly fluid ( a sperm drop ) .
Then He perfected ( organs and limbs in ) him and breathed into him of His spirit ( i . e . life ) and made for you ( also in the mothers womb ) ears and ( then ) eyes and ( then ) hearts and brains . You give thanks but little .
And the disbelievers say : When we are lost in the earth , shall we then be created anew ? In fact they deny the meeting with their Lord .
Say : The angel of death that is appointed over you will terminate your life . Then you will be sent back to your Lord .
And ( you will wonder at them ) if you see the sinners hanging down their heads before the Presence of their Lord ( and saying : ) O our Lord , we have seen and heard , so send us back ( to the world now ) so that we do pious deeds . Surely we believe with certitude .
And had We intended We would have given guidance to every soul ( Ourselves ) , but this Command from Me has been confirmed : I will certainly fill Hell with all the ( disbelieving ) jinn and mankind .
So ( now ) savour the taste that you had forgotten your meeting of this Day . Surely We have forgotten you . And enjoy the flavour of everlasting torment , a reward of your deeds which you continued to do .
So only those who believe in Our Revelations , when directed and guided by means of these ( Verses ) , fall down prostrating themselves and glorify their Lord with praise . And they do not attempt arrogance .
Their sides stay away from their beds and they call out to their Lord in a ( mingled state ) of fear and hope and spend ( in Our Way ) out of the sustenance We have provided them .
So no one knows what coolness of eyes is kept hidden for them . This will be a reward for those ( pious deeds ) which they used to do .
How can a person who is a believer be like him who is disobedient ? ( Nay , ) they ( both ) cannot be equal .
So those who believe and keep doing good deeds , for them are Gardens of eternal repose as an entertainment and honour ( from their Lord ) in reward for those ( works ) which they used to do .
But as for those who disobeyed , their abode is Hell . Every time they will intend to get out of it and escape , they will be turned back into it and it will be said to them : Keep enjoying the taste of this Fire of Hell which you used to belie .
And surely before the major torment ( of the Hereafter ) , We shall make them savour the ( taste of ) nearby torment ( in this world ) so that they abstain ( from disbelief ) .
And who is a greater wrongdoer than someone who is admonished by means of Revelations of His Lord , and then he turns away from them ? Surely We take revenge on the evildoers .
And verily We gave Musa ( Moses ) the Book ( Torah ) . So do not have any doubt with regard to his meeting . ( That meeting is about to take place during the Night of the Ascension . ) And We made it a guidance for the Children of Israel .
And We made from among them authorities and leaders who kept disseminating guidance by Our Command when they persevered with patience . And they believed in Our Revelations with certitude .
Surely your Lord alone will judge between them on the Day of Resurrection concerning matters in which they used to disagree .
And have they not taken any guidance ( from this proclamation ) that how many generations We have destroyed before them in whose dwellings these people ( now ) move about ? Surely there are Signs in it . So do they not hear ?
And have they not seen that We stream water towards the dry land , then with that We produce crops of which their cattle as well as they themselves eat ? Do they not observe ?
And they say : When will this ( Day of ) Judgment take place if you are truthful ?
Say : On the Day of Judgment the belief of disbelievers will bring them no benefit , nor will they be given any respite .
So turn your face away from them and wait and they ( too ) are waiting .
O Prophet ! Remain firm in fearing Allah ( with perseverance as before ) and do not agree at all to what the disbelievers and the hypocrites say ( : conclude with us religious agreement ) . Surely Allah is All - Knowing , Most Wise .
And continue following this ( Command ) which is revealed to you from your Lord . Surely Allah is Well Aware of the works that you do .
And maintain your trust in Allah and Sufficient is Allah as a Guardian .
Allah has not made for any man two hearts inside his breast chamber ; nor has He made your wives your mothers whom you call mothers by way of Zihar ( a form of divorce ) . Nor He has made your adopted sons your ( real ) sons . These are merely the utterances of your mouth . And Allah says the Truth and He alone shows the ( straight ) path .
Call them ( the adopted sons ) after their fathers ( names ) . That is most just in the sight of Allah . So if you do not know their fathers , then they are your brothers ( in Din [ Religion ] ) and your friends . And there is no sin on you for what you said by mistake but ( that will be a sure sin ) which your hearts intend . And Allah is Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
This ( Esteemed ) Prophet is nearer to and has a greater claim on the believers than their own souls and his ( pure ) wives are their mothers . And blood relations have a greater claim one to another ( in the distribution of inheritance ) in the Book of Allah than ( the rest of ) the believers and the emigrants except that you desire to do favour to your friends . This Command is written in the Book of Allah .
And , ( O Beloved , recall ) when We took a covenant from the Prophets ( to preach faith in their Prophethood ) and ( specially ) from you and from Nuh ( Noah ) and from Ibrahim ( Abraham ) and Musa ( Moses ) and Isa ( Jesus ) son of Mayam ( Mary ) and We took from them a solemn covenant .
So that ( Allah ) may ask the Truthful about their truth . And He has prepared an agonizing torment for the disbelievers .
O believers ! Recall Allahs favour to you when the forces ( of disbelievers ) came upon you . Then We sent wind and troops ( of angels ) against them whom you did not see . And Allah sees best what you do .
When they ( the disbelievers ) invaded you from above ( the eastern side of the valley ) and from below ( the western side of the valley ) , and when ( your ) eyes were distracted ( with terror ) , and ( your ) hearts rose up to your throats ( with horror ) , and you began to think various uncertainties about Allah ( in a state of fear and hope ) .
At that stage the believers were put to trial and were shaken with mighty jolts .
And when the hypocrites and those in whose hearts was a disease ( of instability of faith and doubt and suspicion ) said : Allah and His Messenger [ blessings and peae be upon him ] gave us a promise ( of victory ) just to deceive and betray .
And when a party of them said : O people of Yathrib ! There is no position left for you to stay ( safely ) , so go back ( home ) , and a party of them began to seek permission from the Holy Prophet ( to go back ) , saying : Our houses are lying exposed , whereas their houses were not exposed ; they only wanted to escape ( on this pretext ) .
And if the armies had entered upon them from all the sides of Madina and they ( the hypocrites ) had been asked pertaining to the subversion ( of disbelief and polytheism ) , they would have accepted ( the demand ) and would not have delayed it except for a little pause .
And certainly before this they had made a covenant with Allah that they would not turn their backs and run away . And the covenant made with Allah will ( certainly ) be asked about .
Say : Escape will not benefit you at all . If you seek to flee ( fearing ) death or slaughter you will gain little ( from life ) except a brief time out .
Say : Who is the one that can protect you from Allah if He intends to afflict you with suffering or to bestow upon you His Mercy ? And they will not find for themselves any protector or helper apart from Allah .
Surely Allah knows those among you who hinder ( from the Holy Prophet and from fighting in his holy companionship ) and who say to their brothers : Come to us . And they themselves come to fight but little .
( They do so ) being miserly in your case . But when a fear ( situation ) arises , you will see them looking at you , their eyes rolling like those of someone fainting into death . But when fear departs , they offend you with sharp tongues ( injuring heart ) . They are ( in a state of feeling ) too greedy for booty . ( In fact ) they have not yet believed . So Allah has annulled all their deeds . And that is easy for Allah .
They ( still ) imagine that the disbelievers troops have not yet gone ( back ) , and if those troops should come ( again ) they would wish them join villagers settling as nomads and ( conduct surveillance to ) collect news about you . And even if they were among you they would not fight except a very few .
In truth in ( the holy being of ) Allahs Messenger [ blessings and peae be upon him ] there is for you a most perfect and beautiful model ( of life ) for every such person that expects and aspires to ( meeting ) Allah and the Last Day and remembers Allah abundantly .
And when the believers saw the armies ( of disbelievers ) they said : This is what Allah and His Messenger promised us and Allah and His Messenger have spoken the truth . So this ( spectacle ) increased their faith and their commitment to submission to Allah .
Among the believers ( a great number of ) men proved true what covenant they made with Allah . Of them is someone who has fulfilled his vow ( by attaining to martyrdom ) , and of them is someone who is waiting ( for his turn ) . But they have not changed ( their covenant ) in the least .
That Allah may reward the Truthful for their truth and may torment the hypocrites if He wills or may accept their repentance . Surely Allah is Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
And Allah repulsed the disbelievers ( from Madina , defeated , ) with the burning of their rage , for they badly failed to achieve any success . And Allah was Sufficient for the believers in the battle ( of Ahzab [ the Confederates ] ) . And Allah is Ever - Strong , All - Powerful .
And the People of the Book ( among the Banu Quraiza tribe ) who helped those ( disbelievers ) , Allah brought them ( also ) down from their fortresses and filled their hearts with the fear ( of Islam ) . You kill a party of them ( for their war crimes ) and make the other party the prisoners of war .
And He made you the owners of the land , the houses and the wealth and properties of these ( war enemies ) and the ( captured ) territory where you had not even stepped in ( before ) . And Allah has Absolute Power over everything .
O ( Esteemed ) Prophet ! Say to your wives : If you long for the world and its glitter , then come ! I shall make a provision for you and set you free in a handsome manner .
But if you long for Allah and His Messenger and the House of the Hereafter then surely Allah has prepared for the pious among you a tremendous reward .
O Wives of the ( Esteemed ) Prophet ! Whoever of you commits an obvious indecency , the torment for her will be doubled and that is very easy for Allah .
And those of you who remain obedient to Allah and His Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) and persist in pious works , We shall give them double of their reward and We have prepared for them honourable sustenance ( in Paradise ) .
O Wives of the Messenger ! You are not the like of any of the womenfolk . If you want to remain pious and Godfearing , then be not soft in your speech ( while talking to men as and when required ) lest someone whose heart is diseased ( with hypocrisy ) should feel inclined with desire . And ( always ) say words which are pure of any taint of doubt and flexibility .
And remain in your houses with calm and peace and do not display adornment like that of the days of ignorance and establish Prayer and pay Zakat ( the Alms - due ) and keep obeying Allah and His Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) . Allah intends only to remove all impurity of sins from you , O People of the House ( of the Prophet , [ even a doubt or trace of shortfall , ] ) and make you absolutely pure and clean by blessing you with ( perfect ) purity and wholesomeness .
And always remember the Revelations of Allah and the tradition and wisdom ( of the Holy Prophet [ blessings and peace be upon him ] ) which are recited in your homes . Surely Allah is the Master of subtleties ( for His favourite servants - Awliya ) and Well Aware ( of all His Creation ) .
Surely the submissive men and the submissive women , and the believing men and the believing women , and the obedient men and the obedient women , and the truthful men and the truthful women , and the steadfast men and the steadfast women , and the humble men and the humble women , and the men who give alms and the women who give alms , and the men who fast and the women who fast , and the men who guard their chastity and the women who guard their chastity , and the men who remember Allah excessively and the women who remember Allah very much Allah has prepared for all of them forgiveness and a mighty reward .
And neither a believing man nor a believing woman has ( this ) right that , when Allah and His Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) have once given judgment ( or command ) on an affair , they should exercise their own choice in ( doing or not doing that ) work of theirs . And whoever disobeys Allah and His Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) certainly loses his way into open error .
And , ( O Beloved , recall the time ) when you said to him whom Allah had favoured and you ( too ) had done him a favour : Keep your wife ( Zainab ) with you in the bond of marriage and fear Allah . And you were keeping that secret in your heart which Allah was about to reveal . And you had ( for decency ) the fear of ( scoffs of ) people ( in your heart . O Beloved ! You were not required to care for people . ) And Allah alone has a greater right that you should fear Him ( and who is more Godfearing than you ! ) So when ( your adopted ) Zaid fulfilled his desire to divorce her , We married her to you so that there is no blame on the believers for ( marrying ) the wives of their adopted sons , while they have no desire for them ( after divorce ) . And Allahs Command had got to be carried out .
And there is no blame on the Prophet in ( accomplishing ) that duty which Allah has made obligatory for him . And certainly the same has been the way and practice of Allah with those ( as well ) who have passed away before . And the Command of Allah is a decree which has been fulfilled .
And those ( bygone ) people used to communicate the messages of Allah , and feared Him , and were afraid of none but Allah . And Allah is Sufficient as a Reckoner .
Muhammad ( blessings and peace be upon him ) is not the father of any of your men , but he is the Messenger of Allah and the Last of the Prophets ( ending the chain of the Prophets ) . And Allah is the Perfect Knower of everything .
O Believers ! Keep remembering Allah abundantly .
And glorify Him morning and evening .
He is the One Who sends peace and blessings on you and His angels as well , so that He may take you out of the layers of darkness into the light . And He is Ever - Merciful to the believers .
On the Day when they ( the believers ) will meet Him , their gift ( of the meeting greeting ) will be : Peace ! And He has kept ready for them most honourable reward .
O ( Esteemed ) Prophet ! Surely We have sent you as a Witness ( to the Truth and the Creation ) , a Bearer of glad tidings ( of the Beauty of the Hereafter ) and a Warner ( of the Torment in the Hereafter ) .
And ( as ) an Inviter towards Allah by His Command and as a Sun spreading Light .
And give good news to the believers that there is for them Allahs great Bounty ( that they are cloaked in the affinity of slavery to this Final Messenger of Allah ) .
And never ( ever ) agree to what the disbelievers and hypocrites say : ( conclude with us a religious agreement ) . And disregard their hurtful misbehaviour , and maintain your trust in Allah ( with persistence ) . And Allah alone is Sufficient as a Guardian ( in the conflict between the Truth and falsehood ) .
O Believers ! When you marry the believing women and then divorce them before you have touched them ( i . e . had sexual intercourse with them ) , then no waiting period is ( obligatory ) on them for you which you may start counting . So give them some provision and send them off nicely extending to them excellent morality .
O Prophet ! Surely We have made lawful for you those of your wives whom you have paid their dower and those who are in your possession ( according to Allahs Commandments ) whom Allah has given you as spoils of war , and the daughters of your paternal uncles , and the daughters of your paternal aunts , and the daughters of your maternal uncles , and the daughters of your maternal aunts who have emigrated with you , and any other believing woman who dedicates herself to the Holy Prophet ( for marriage ) provided the Holy Prophet ( too ) has the intention to marry her ( so all these are lawful for you . This Command is ) exclusively for you alone , not for other believers ( of the Umma [ Community ] ) . Indeed We know best what We have prescribed for them ( the Muslims ) concerning their wives and the slave girls they possess . ( But this exclusive Command for lawfulness of number of wives in your respect has been given ) so that there remains for you no bottleneck ( in making elaborate arrangements for the education and training of the women of the Muslim Umma [ Community ] ) . And Allah is Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
( O Prophet ! You have free choice ) to postpone ( the turn of ) any ( wife ) whom you may please from among your wives and keep with you ( any of them on priority ) whom you may please . And there is no blame on you if you desire her ( to be with you ) from whom you kept distance ( for a while ) . This makes possible for them cooling their eyes ( by seeing you ) and they will not remain grieved and they all will feel pleased and delighted for what you have blessed them with . And Allah knows best what is in your hearts and Allah is All - Knowing , Forbearing .
After that ( they have preferred your pleasure and your service to the worldly benefits ) , it is not lawful for you also ( to marry ) more women ( so that these wives alone may enjoy the distinction of their glory ) . Nor is it lawful that ( in case of divorce to some and regarding it Our Command to maintain the present number of wives ) you take ( into marriage ) other wives in their place , even though their beauty ( of behaviour , moral conduct and style of preaching Din [ Religion ] ) may seem to you pleasingly excellent . But the slave girl that is in your possession ( by Our Command is lawful ) . And Allah is Ever Watchful over everything .
O Believers ! Do not enter the houses of the Holy Prophet [ blessings and peace be upon him ] unless permission is granted to you for a meal . Nor ( reach so early as to ) wait for the cooking of the meal . But when you are invited then enter ( at that time ) . Then when you have eaten the meal , ( get up from there and ) disperse without delay and do not linger on in eagerness for talk .
Surely your ( sitting for long in this ) manner discomforts the Holy Prophet [ blessings and peace be upon him ] ; and he feels reluctant to ( ask ) you ( to leave ) but Allah does not hesitate in ( saying ) the Truth .
And when you ask them ( the pure wives ) for something , ask them from behind a curtain .
This ( regard and nice manner ) causes great purity for your hearts and for their hearts .
And it is not ( at all lawful ) for you that you cause inconvenience to the Holy Messenger of Allah [ blessings and peace be upon him ] , nor is this ( lawful ) that you marry his ( pure ) wives after him , till the end of time .
Surely it is the most grievous sin in the sight of Allah .
Whether you disclose something or conceal it , Allah is certainly the Most Perfect Knower of everything .
There is no sin on them ( if they do not veil themselves ) from their ( real ) fathers , and their sons , their brothers , their brothers sons , their sisters sons , their own ( Muslim ) women and from those slave girls whom they possess . Keep fearing Allah . Surely Allah is Witness to and Ever - Watchful over everything .
Surely Allah and ( all ) His angels invoke blessings and greetings on the Holy Prophet [ blessings and peace be upon him ] . O Believers ! You ( also ) send blessings on him and salute him with a worthy salutation of peace abundantly ( and fervently ) .
Surely those who offend Allah and His Prophet , Allah curses them in the world and in the Hereafter and He has prepared for them a disgraceful torment .
And those who hurt the believing men and the believing women without their doing anything ( wrong ) , surely they bear ( on themselves ) the burden of a false allegation and an open sin .
O Prophet ! Say to your wives , your daughters and the women of believers that ( while going out ) they should draw their veils as coverings over them . It is more likely that this way they may be recognized ( as pious , free women ) and may not be hurt ( considered by mistake as roving slave girls ) . And Allah is Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
If the hypocrites and those in whose hearts is the disease ( of malice and insolence against the Holy Prophet [ blessings and peace be upon him ] ) and ( likewise ) those who spread false rumours in Madina do not desist , then We shall certainly make you overmaster them . Then they will not be able to stay in the neighbourhood of Madina but for a few ( days ) .
( These ) accursed people ( who spread false rumours , promote hatred , strife and terrorism and denigrate the Holy Messenger and his family ) , wherever found , are to be seized and mercilessly killed by way of target killing .
This practice of Allah has ( continued ) through generations that have passed before , and you will never find any amendment in the way practised by Allah .
The people ask you about ( the Hour of ) Resurrection . Say : Its knowledge is with Allah alone . And who has made you awareit may be that the Last Hour has drawn near ?
Surely Allah has cursed the disbelievers and has kept ready for them the Blazing Fire ( of Hell ) .
They will live in it forever . They will find neither any caring friend nor any supporting helper .
On the Day when their faces will be ( repeatedly ) turned over in the Fire of Hell , they will say : Alas ! Would that we had obeyed Allah and we had obeyed the Holy Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) !
And they will say : O our Lord , surely we abided by what our chiefs and the influential ones directed , so they turned us away from the ( straight ) path .
O our Lord ! Afflict them with double torment and lay on them a mighty curse .
O Believers ! Do not be like those who hurt Musa ( [ Moses ] by means of their denigrating words ) . So Allah proved him clear of the blames which they levelled against him . And he ( Musa [ Moses ] ) had great honour and high standing in the sight of Allah .
O Believers ! Always fear Allah and say what is correct and straight .
He will set ( all ) your deeds right for you and will forgive you your sins . And whoever obeys Allah and His Holy Messenger [ blessings and peace be upon him ] will surely achieve a great success .
Indeed We offered the Trust ( of Obedience ) to the heavens and the earth and the mountains , but they declined to bear this ( burden ) and felt scared of it but man took it on . Verily he is ever so wrongdoing ( against his own soul ) , unwise and extremely ignorant ( of the consequence of lapse in paying back the trust ) .
( This is ) so because Allah may torment the hypocrites , men and women , and the polytheists , men and women , and Allah may accept repentance of the believers , men and women . And Allah is Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
All praise be to Allah alone to Whom belongs all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth , and to Him belongs praise in the Hereafter ( as well ) . And He is All - Wise , Well Aware .
He knows ( all ) the things that go into the earth and that come out from it and those that descend from heaven and that ascend to it . And He is Ever - Merciful , Most Forgiving .
And the disbelievers say : The Last Hour will not come upon us . Say : Why not ? By my Lord Who is the Knower of the Unseen that is bound to come upon you . Nothing can be out of His sight , not even a dust particle in the heavens or in the earth . Nor is there anything smaller or bigger than an atom but is ( recorded ) in the light - giving Book ( i . e . al - Lawh al - Mahfuz ) .
In order that Allah may recompense in full those who believe and continue doing good deeds . It is they for whom there is forgiveness and honourable sustenance ( for the Last Day ) .
And those who strived in ( opposition to ) Our Revelations presuming to frustrate ( Us ) , it is they for whom there is punishment of a highly agonizing torment .
And those who have been given knowledge know that ( the Book ) which has been revealed to you from your Lord is alone the Truth . And that ( Book ) guides to the path of Most Exalted in Might , All - Praiseworthy ( Lord ) .
And the disbelievers say ( with the intention to wonder and mock ) : Shall we tell you of a person who informs you that when you have decomposed completely into dust particles ( after death ) , you will certainly be composed into a new creation ?
( Either ) he has invented a lie against Allah or he is insane . ( Nothing of the sort ! ) The truth is that those who do not believe in the Hereafter are undergoing a torment and are in farthest error .
So have they not seen those ( Signs ) in the heaven and the earth ( which have beset them ) from their front and from their rear ? If We so intend We would sink them into the earth or let a part of the sky fall upon them . Verily there is in it a Sign for every servant of Allah who turns to Him .
And indeed We bestowed on Dawud ( David ) a tremendous favour from Our Presence ( and ordained : ) O mountains , join him in chanting melodious tunes ( of Our glory and praise ) . And ( We gave the same command ) to the birds as well ( making them subservient ) . And We made iron soft for him .
( And commanded : ) Make wide and full - length coats of mail and care for the measure while joining ( their ) links ( rings ) . And , ( O Family of Dawud [ David ] , ) continue doing pious deeds . I am watching minutely the works that you do .
And to Sulaiman ( [ Solomon ] We made subservient ) the wind whose morning course was a months journey and the evening course ( too ) was a months journey . And We caused a spring of molten copper to flow for him and ( made subservient to him ) some jinn who worked in front of him by the Command of his Lord . ( And We had warned that ) whoever of them turned away from Our Command We would make him taste the Blazing Fire of Hell .
They ( the jinn ) used to make for him whatever he desired of lofty and strong fortresses and statues and basins large as reservoirs looking like huge cauldrons fixed in their places . O Family of Dawud ( David ) ! Keep giving thanks ( to Allah ) . And very few of My servants have been grateful !
And when We decreed Sulaimans ( Solomons ) death , nothing made them ( the jinn ) aware of his death except a termite of the earth which kept eating his staff . Then when his body came to the ground it became known to the jinn that if they had known the Unseen , they would not have been in that humiliating torment .
In fact for ( the people of ) Saba ( Sheba ) a sign did exist in their homeland itself . ( They ) were two gardens , one on the right hand and the other on the left . ( They were commanded : ) Eat of the provision from your Lord and keep giving Him thanks . ( How ) pure is ( your ) city and a Lord , Most Forgiving !
Then they turned away ( from obedience ) . So We let loose against them a devastating flood , and We converted both their gardens into ( such ) gardens as bearing sour and bitter fruit and tamarisks and a few lote - trees .
So We paid them back for their disbelief and ingratitude . And We award ( such ) punishment to none except the highly ungrateful .
And We set up prominent ( and ) adjacent settlements between the dwellers and those towns that We had blessed ( on the Yemen - Syria highway ) , and We had placed between them stopover motels ( for rest ) while travelling up and down , that you may move between them by night and by day in peace and security .
Then they said : O our Lord , place between our break - journey points longer distances . And they wronged their souls . So We made them tales ( for a lesson of warning ) . And We disintegrated them into pieces and scattered them . Surely there are signs in it for a greatly patient and highly thankful person .
No doubt Iblis translated his idea about them into reality . So they followed him except a group comprising ( the true ) believers .
And Satan had no power over them but for the reason that We might distinguish those who believe in the Hereafter from those who are in doubt about it . And your Lord is Watchful over everything .
Say : Call upon those you consider ( gods ) apart from Allah . They do not possess even the smallest particle either in the heavens or in the earth . They have no share in either of them ( the heavens and the earth ) . Nor is anyone of them a helper to Allah .
And no intercession with His Holy Presence will be of any benefit except from someone He has granted permission , until when fright is removed from their hearts and they will say , ( inquiring ) : What has your Lord said ? They will say ( in reply ) : He has said the Truth , ( i . e . has granted the permission ) . And He alone is Most High , Most Great .
Say : Who provides you sustenance from the heavens and the earth ? Say ( yourself ) : Allah ( provides ) . And no doubt either we or you are guided aright or lost in open error .
Say : You will not be asked about the sin that ( you presume ) we have perpetrated . Nor shall we be asked about what you do .
Say : Our Lord will assemble all of us ( on the Day of Rising ) , then will judge among us with the Truth . And He is the Best Judge , All - Knowing .
Say : Show me the partners you have associated with Allah . There is no ( partner ) at all . Truly He is the One Who is Almighty , Most Wise .
And , ( O Esteemed Prophet , ) We have not sent you but as a Bearer of the glad tidings and as a Warner to the entire mankind , but most people do not know .
And they say : When will this promise ( of the Last Hour ) come true if you are truthful ?
Say : The Day of Promise is appointed for you . You will not be able to either put it back for a moment or put it forward .
And the disbelievers say : We shall not believe in this Quran or in that ( Revelation ) at all which came before it . And if you could see when the wrongdoers shall be made to stand before their Lord , ( what a spectacle would that be ! ) Everyone of them will be putting the blame back on others . The humble will say to the conceited : Had you not been there we would certainly have believed .
The conceited will say to the humble : Did we hinder you from guidance after it had come to you ? The truth is that you were evildoers yourselves .
The humble will then say to the conceited : Nay , it was ( your ) deceptive scheming night and day ( that hindered us ) when you used to order us to disbelieve in Allah and assign equals to Him . And they will hide their pang of guilt ( from one another ) when they will see the torment . And We will put iron collars round the necks of the disbelievers and they will be recompensed only for their doings .
And never did We send a Warner to any town but its wealthy ones would ( always ) say : We deny ( the guidance ) you have been sent with .
And they said : We are super respecting wealth and children and we are not going to be tormented .
Say : Surely my Lord releases sustenance in abundance for whom He wills and restrains ( for whom He likes ) but most people do not know .
And it is not your wealth or your children that can bring you nearness and intimacy in Our Presence . But whoever believes and does good works , it is they for whom the reward is twofold for their works . And they will live in peace in lofty mansions ( of Paradise ) .
And those who strive ( in opposition ) to Our Revelations presuming to frustrate ( Us ) , it is they who will be brought to the torment .
Say : Surely my Lord releases sustenance in abundance for whom He wills and restrains for whom ( He likes ) . And whatever you spend ( in the way of Allah ) , He will increase it with more in recompense . And He is the Best Sustainer .
And the Day when He will gather all together , then He will say to the angels : Is it they who used to worship you ?
They will submit : Glory be to You ; You alone are our Protector , not they ! In fact they used to worship the jinn . It was in them that most of them believed .
So Today you have no authority over profit or loss of one another . And We shall say to the wrongdoers : Savour the taste of the torment of Hell that you used to belie .
And when Our illumining Verses are recited to them , they say : This ( Messenger [ blessings and peace be upon him ] ) is only a man who wants to hinder you from those ( idols ) your fathers used to worship . And they ( also ) say : This ( Quran ) is merely a fabricated lie . And the disbelievers ( also ) say about this Truth ( the Quran ) while it has come to them : It is nothing but obvious magic .
And neither did We give them ( i . e . the residents of Makka ) the revealed Books which they would recite , nor did We send to them any Warner before you .
And the preceding communities also denied ( the Truth ) . And they have not yet attained to even one tenth of what We granted them ( i . e . the bygone people ) . But they too denied My Messengers . So how ( awful ) did My denial ( proved ) to be !
Say : I advise you but only one thing : stand up for Allah in twos or singly ( warned and spiritually awake ) . Then meditate ( i . e . inspect the reality and introspect ; the Truth will dawn on you ) that he ( the Holy Messenger [ blessings and peace be upon him ] ) who has honoured you with his companionship is not even touched by any mania . He is but a Warner giving you ( timely ) warning before the severe torment ( comes , so that you may wake up from neglectfulness and unawareness ) .
Say : Any reward that I might have sought from you ( for this favour ) , I have given that back to you . My reward is with Allah alone . And He keeps watch over everything .
Say : My Lord reveals the Truth ( to the Prophets . He ) is the All - Knower of all the Unseen .
Say : The Truth has come and falsehood can neither originate ( anything ) nor can it regenerate .
Say : If I were to lose the straight path , the sin ( or harm ) of losing the straight path would afflict only my soul , and if I am rightly guided it is so because my Lord sends His Revelation to me . Surely He is All - Hearing , Ever - Near .
And if you visualize ( their plight ) when they will be most upset , they will not then be able to escape and will be seized from a nearby place .
And they will say : We have believed in it . But how can they now attain to ( faith ) from ( such ) a far - off place ?
In fact they had disbelieved before this . And they have been throwing arrows of falsehood and doubt without seeing from a distant place .
And a barrier was placed between them and their desires , as was done before with the people of their kind . Surely they were suffering from a deceiving doubt .
All praise belongs to Allah alone Who is the Creator of ( all the infinities of ) the heavens and the earth , and Who makes the angels messengers having two or three or four wings , and adds to ( and expands ) the Creation as He wills . Surely Allah is All - Powerful over everything .
Whatever of ( the treasure of ) His Mercy Allah opens to mankind there is none who can withhold it . And whatever He withholds then after this there is none who may release it . And He alone is Almighty , Most Wise .
O people ! Remember persistently the favour that Allah has bestowed on you . Is there any Creator other than Allah who may provide you sustenance from the heaven and the earth ? There is no God but He . So where are you wandering disorientated ?
And if they reject you , many Messengers have been rejected before you . And all matters will be returned to Allah alone .
O people ! Certainly the Promise of Allah is true . So let not the worldly life deceive you at all . Nor let the Arch - Deceiver Satan deceive you ( in the Name ) of Allah .
Assuredly Satan is your enemy , so you too keep treating him as an enemy ( being his adversary ) . He calls his party only to make them join the inmates of Hell .
There is a severe torment for those who disbelieve and there is forgiveness and a mighty reward for those who believe and keep doing pious deeds .
So what about him whose evil action has been made attractive to him but he starts considering it good ( actually ? Can he be like a virtuous believer ? ) Surely Allah holds astray whoever He wills and guides to the straight path whoever He wills . ( O life of the universe ! ) Let not your soul waste away in grief for them . Surely Allah is Best Aware of whatever they do .
And Allah alone sends winds that raise and build up clouds . Then We drive it ( the cloud ) towards some dry and dead land to water it . Then with that We give life to the earth after its death . Similar will be the process of rising ( of the dead alive ) .
Whoever desires honour then to Allah belongs all honour . The pure words ascend to Him alone and He is the One Who elevates ( the grades of ) a pious deed . And those who keep engaged in evil maneuvers , for them is severe punishment and their deceiving schemes will go void .
And Allah alone created you from clay ( i . e . inorganic matter ) , then from a sperm drop , then He made you pairs . And no female conceives nor gives birth but with His knowledge . And no aged mans life is increased nor is his age decreased but ( all this ) is recorded in a Book ( al - Lawh al - Mahfuz ) . That surely is quite easy for Allah .
And two seas ( or rivers ) cannot be the same : this ( one ) is sweet , thirst - quenching and pleasant to drink and that ( other ) is salty and very bitter . And you eat fresh meat from each and bring forth ornaments ( including pearls and corals ) that you wear . And you see in them boats ( and ships ) that chop through ( the water ) , so that you may seek His bounty ( through marine trade routes ) and that you may become grateful .
He causes the night to pass into the day and the day to pass into the night . And He has subjected the sun and the moon ( to a system ) , each rotating for an appointed term . Such is Allah your Lord . His is all the Sovereignty . And the idols that you worship apart from Him do not own ( even ) the thin membrane of a date stone .
( O polytheists ! ) If you call upon them , they ( are idols ; ) they cannot hear your call . But if ( supposing ) they hear they cannot give you an answer . And on the Day of Resurrection they will downright deny your setting up partners with Allah . And none will make you aware like Allah , Well Aware .
O mankind ! You all are dependent upon Allah and Allah is the One Who is Independent , Most Praiseworthy .
If He wills , He will destroy you and bring in a new creation .
And that is not at all difficult for Allah .
And no bearer of burden will bear anothers burden ( of sins ) . And if someone heavily loaded calls ( another ) to share his load , nothing of his burden will be carried by him even though he be a close relative . ( O Beloved ! ) You warn but those who fear their Lord unseen and establish Prayer . And whoever acquires purity does so to his own benefit . And to Allah is the return .
And the blind and the seeing cannot be alike .
Nor ( can ) the darkness and the light ( be alike ) .
And nor the shade and the hot sun .
And nor the living and the dead can be alike . Surely Allah makes him hear whom He wills , and it is not your responsibility to make those hear who are ( buried ) in the graves ( i . e . you are not responsible to make the disbelievers accept what you say ) .
You are only a Warner .
Surely We have sent you with the Truth and Guidance as a Bearer of good news and a Warner ( for the Hereafter ) . And there is not a single Umma ( Community ) but among whom did pass ( some ) Warner .
And if they deny you then surely the people before you have ( also ) denied . Their Messengers came to them ( also ) with clear Signs and Scriptures and the illumining Book .
Then I seized those disbelievers ( with the torment ) . So how ( awful ) proved to be ( their ) denying Me !
Have you not seen that Allah sent down water from the sky ? Then We brought forth with that the fruits which have different colours . And similarly in the mountains there are white and red streaks with a variety of shades and there are deep black ( streaks ) as well .
And likewise there are various colours among men and beasts and animals . So only those of His servants who have knowledge ( of these realities with a vision and outlook ) fear Him . Surely Allah is Almighty , Most Forgiving .
Surely those who recite the Book of Allah and establish Prayer and spend secretly and openly in Our Way out of what We have given them look forward to a trade ( in the Hereafter ) which will never run into loss .
So that Allah may pay them their reward in full and may bless them more out of His bounty . Surely Allah is Most Forgiving , Most Appreciative of thanks .
And the Book ( the Quran ) that We have revealed to you is the Truth and confirms the former Books . Surely Allah is Well Aware of His servants , All - Seeing .
Then We made those We chose from among Our servants ( i . e . the Muslim Umma [ Community ] ) the inheritors of the Book ( the Quran ) . So of them are those who wrong their own souls , and of them are also those who are moderate following the middle course , and of them are still those who excel in doing pious deeds by Allahs Command . This ( excelling and becoming perfect ) is but great Bounty ( of Allah ) .
They shall enter the Gardens of Adn ( Eden Paradise for eternal stay ) . Therein they will be adorned with bracelets of gold and pearls and their dress will be made of silk .
And they will say : All gratitude and praise belong to Allah Who has removed from us all grief . Surely our Lord is Most Forgiving , Most Appreciative of gratitude .
Who has , out of His Bounty , admitted us to a timeless abode wherein will touch us neither labour nor fatigue .
And those who disbelieved , for them is the Fire of Hell . Neither will ( death ) be decreed for them that they should die ; nor will anything of their torment be lessened . We pay back every disobedient the same way .
And they will howl in Hell : O our Lord , take us out ( from here ) . We shall ( now ) do righteous works different from those ( works ) we used to do ( before ) . ( Allah will say : ) Did We not grant you long enough life during which whoever wanted to seek advice might reflect ? And ( moreover ) a Warner too had come to you . So savour now the taste ( of the torment ) , and there will be no helper for the wrongdoers .
Surely Allah knows the unseen of the heavens and the earth . He is undoubtedly Well Aware of things ( hidden ) in breasts .
He is the One Who made you successors ( of former communities ) in the earth . So the one who disbelieves , is to face the suffering of disbelief . And the denial of the disbelievers increases for them nothing in the sight of their Lord except His displeasure . And the infidels disbelief adds to them nothing but loss .
Say : Have you seen your partner - gods you worship apart from Allah ? Show me what they have created of the earth . Or do they have any share in ( the creation of ) the heavens ? Or have We given them any Book so that they stick to its evidence ? ( Nothing at all ! ) In fact the wrongdoers promise one another nothing but deception .
Surely Allah is holding the heavens and the earth ( through His Control System ) lest they should move away ( from their respective locations and orbits / routes ) . And if they both start deviating , then none can hold them both after Him . Surely He is Most Forbearing , Most Forgiving .
And they used to swear solemn oaths by Allah that if a Warner came to them , they would certainly be far more on the straight path than any other community . But when the Warner ( the Final Messenger of Allah [ blessings and peace be upon him ] ) came to them it only increased their aversion to the Truth .
( They opted ) to consider themselves the greatest in the earth and to maneuver evil schemes . And the evil schemes encompass only the schemer . So they are waiting ( for nothing ) but the pattern of ( torment that seized ) the bygone people . And you will not find any amendments in Allah ' s Sunna . Nor will you find divergence ( and digression ) in Allah ' s Sunna .
Have they not travelled in the land and seen what was the end of people who have passed before them ? They were far more powerful than these people are . And Allah is not such as anything in the heavens or ( anything ) in the earth can make Him helpless . Indeed He is All - Knowing , All - Powerful .
And if Allah were to seize people ( by torment ) for the ( evil ) deeds which they have earned , He would not spare any moving creature on the surface of the earth . But He is giving them respite till an appointed time . Then when their appointed time comes , Allah is Ever - Vigilant of His servants .
Ya - Sin . ( Only Allah and the Messenger [ blessings and peace be upon him ] know the real meaning . )
By the Quran , full of Wisdom .
You are indeed one of the Messengers .
On the Straight Path .
This is revealed by Almighty , Ever - Merciful .
That you may warn the people whose fathers were ( also ) not warned . So they are careless and neglectful .
In fact Our Command has proved true against most of them . So they will not believe .
Surely We have put iron collars round their necks reaching their chins . So they have raised their heads up .
And We have set a wall before them and a wall behind them , and We have cast a veil over their eyes so they do not see anything .
And it is all the same for them whether you warn or do not warn them , they will not believe .
You can only warn him who follows the direction and guidance and fears the Most Kind Lord unseen . So give him the good news of forgiveness and a reward of great honour .
Surely We alone raise the dead alive . And We are writing down ( the deeds ) which they have sent forward and their effects ( that are left behind ) . And We have encompassed everything in the illumining Book ( al - Lawh al - Mahfuz ) .
And ( in story - telling style ) narrate to them the example of the people of a city ( Antioch - an ancient city in North Syria ) , when there came to them some Messengers .
When ( at first ) We sent to them two Messengers , they rejected them both . Then We reinforced ( them ) with a third ( Messenger ) . Then the three of them said : Surely we have been sent to you .
( The people of the city ) said : You are but human beings like us , and the Most Kind Lord has not sent down anything . You are only lying .
( The Messengers ) said : Our Lord knows that assuredly we have been sent to you .
And there is no binding upon us except to communicate the message expressly .
( The people of the city ) said : An evil omen has reached us from you . If you do not desist , we shall certainly stone you and you will definitely suffer an agonizing punishment at our hands .
( The Messengers ) said : Your evil omen is with you . Is it an evil omen that you are admonished ? Nay , but you are a people who exceed limits .
And a person came running from the farthest end of the city . He said : O my people , follow the Messengers .
Follow those who do not ask from you any compensation and who are rightly guided .
And what is the matter with me that I should not worship Him Who has created me and to Him ( all of ) you will be returned ?
Should I take such gods apart from Him ( Allah ) that if the Most Kind Lord intends to do me any harm , their intercession would not bring me any benefit , nor would they be able to rescue me ?
Then , certainly I would be in open error .
Surely , I have believed in your Lord , so listen to me ( attentively ) .
( The disbelievers martyred him ; then it ) was said ( to him ) : ( Come , ) enter Paradise . He said : Alas ! Would that my people knew .
That my Lord has forgiven me and put me among the honoured and near ones .
And , after him , We did not send any army ( of angels ) from the heaven to his people , nor were We to send down ( angels to destroy them ) .
( Their torment ) was nothing but a Mighty Blast , and there were they put out ( dead like charred coal ) .
Ah ! Woe to ( these ) servants ! Never did a Messenger come to them but they used to mock him .
Have they not seen how many communities We destroyed before them , and that now they will not return to them .
But that all of them will be brought before Our Presence ?
And a sign for them is the dead earth to which We gave life , and We brought forth from it ( grain ) ; then they eat of it .
And We produced in it gardens of date - palms and grapes , and also caused some springs as well to gush forth in it .
So that they may eat of its fruits . And it is not their hands that made it . Do they not thank ( even ) then ?
Glory be to Him Who created everything in pairs of those the earth grows and of themselves as well and , ( moreover , ) of the things they do not know .
And ( also ) a sign for them is the night : ( how ) We draw the day out from it ! So then they are left in darkness !
And the sun is always rotating ( non - stop ) for its appointed destination . It is a measure fixed by Almighty , All - Knowing ( Lord ) .
And We have also appointed stages ( of motion and rotation ) of the moon till ( its appearance to the dwellers of the earth wanes to ) the semblance of an old dry branch of a palm - tree .
Neither can the sun ( deviate from its orbit and ) overtake the moon nor can the night precede the day and all ( the stars and planets ) are moving in their ( respective ) orbits .
And a Sign for them is ( also ) that We boarded their fathers ( the Children of Adam ) into the laden Ark of ( Nuh [ Noah ] and saved them ) .
And like this ( Ark ) We made for them ( many other means of transport ) which they ride .
And if We intend We drown them . Then , there will not be any to respond to their cry , nor will they be saved anyway .
Except for Our Mercy and ( this ) provision is for an appointed term .
And when it is said to them : Fear that ( torment ) which is before you and which is behind you so that you may be shown Mercy .
And not a Sign of the Signs of their Lord comes to them but they turn away from it .
And when it is said to them : Spend ( in the way of Allah ) of what Allah has given you , the disbelievers say to the believers : Shall we feed that ( poor ) man whom , if Allah so willed , He would feed ( Himself ) ? You are but ( caught ) in clear error .
And they say : When will this promise ( of the Last Hour ) be fulfilled if you are truthful ?
They are simply waiting for a Mighty Blast which will seize them ( all of sudden ) , and they will be disputing among themselves .
Then they will not be able to make a will or to return to their families .
And ( when ) the Trumpet will be blown ( again ) they will come out of the graves at once and run towards their Lord .
( Seeing the horrors of the Hour of Resurrection , ) they will say : Ah , woe to us ! Who has raised us from our sleeping apartments ? This ( coming back to life ) is the same that the Most Kind Lord promised and the Messengers spoke the Truth .
This will only be a Mighty Blast . Then all of them will be brought to Our Presence straight away .
So today no soul will be wronged in the least . Nor will you be rewarded except for the deeds you used to do .
Surely the residents of Paradise will be rejoicing today ( in their ) favourite pastime pursuits ( like spiritual visits , entertainments , sessions of hymns and spiritual musical performance and other favours ) .
They and their wives will be reclining on raised couches under the deep calming shades .
There they will be provided with fruits ( of every kind ) and will find ( available ) everything they will solicit .
Peace ( be upon you ) ! ( This ) greeting will be conveyed ( to them ) from the Ever - Merciful Lord .
And , O evildoers , get aside ( from the righteous ) this Day .
O Children of Adam ! Did I not take this covenant from you not to worship Satan ; no doubt he is your open enemy .
And that you keep worshipping Me alone ? That is the straight path .
And surely he led great many of you astray , so had you not any wisdom ?
This is the same Hell that was being promised to you .
Enter this Hell today , for you kept disbelieving .
Today We shall seal their mouths , and their hands will speak to Us , and their feet will bear witness to the deeds which they used to earn .
And if We had so willed , We would have obliterated the very marks of their eyes . Then if they would have run on the path , how could they have seen ?
And if We had so intended , We would have defaced them in their places . Then they would have power neither to go forward nor to turn back .
And someone whom We give long life , We cause him to degenerate ( towards childhood and debility ) in strength and disposition . So , do they not have sense ?
And We have not taught him ( the Holy Messenger [ blessings and peace be upon him ] ) composing poetry , nor does it befit his dignity . This ( Book ) is but direction and guidance and the illumining Quran .
So that it may warn the one who is alive and the word of judgment may be proved against the disbelievers .
Have they not seen that We created for them cattle out of the ( Creation ) We made with Our Mighty Hand ; so they are their owners ?
And We subjected those ( cattle ) to them . So some of them are their riding animals , and they eat some of them .
And there are other benefits and drinks in them as well for them . Then why they do not give thanks ?
And they have made idols their gods other than Allah with the hope that they will be helped .
These idols are incapable of helping them . And these ( disbelievers and polytheists ) will be an army of these ( idols ) that will be brought ( into Hell together ) .
So let not what they utter hurt you . Surely We know whatever they hide and whatever they make public .
Has man not seen that We have created him from a sperm drop ? Even then , he has become an open adversary .
And he ( himself ) puts forth examples for Us and has forgotten ( the truth of ) his creation . He says : Who will give life to bones when they will have been decomposed ?
Say : He Who created them the first time will give them life . And He knows best every Creation .
He Who produces fire for you out of the green tree so now you kindle fire with the same !
And has He Who created the heavens and the earth not the power to create the like of them ( again ) ? Yes indeed ! And He is the Supreme Creator , All - Knowing .
His Command ( of creation ) is only that when He intends ( to create ) something , He says to it : Be , so it instantly becomes ( existent or visible and continues becoming ) .
So , Glory be to Him in Whose Hand ( Power and Control ) is the Sovereignty over everything and to Him you will be returned .
By the parties ranged in close ranks .
And by those who drive away the clouds or by those parties who severely reprimand evils .
Then by those parties that remember Allah ( or ) recite ( the Holy Quran ) .
Surely your God is One .
The Lord of the heavens and the earth and whatever ( Creation ) is between them , and the Lord of every point of sunrise .
Surely We have decorated the worlds heaven ( the first heavenly sphere ) with the adornment of stars and planets .
And made ( them ) secure from every rebellious Satan .
They ( satans ) cannot listen to the celestial world . And ( burning brands ) are thrown on them from every side .
To repulse them . And for them is eternal torment .
But that ( Satan ) who snatches away ( something from angels ) a burning brand follows it in chase .
Ask them : Are they harder ( and more difficult ) to create or those things which We have created ( in the heavenly universe ) ? Surely We have created them from a sticky clay .
But you express your wonder while they make fun .
And when they are given advice , they do not accept it .
And when they see some Sign , they mock it .
And say : This is but obvious magic .
What ! When we are dead and turned to dust and bones , shall we be certainly raised ( alive again ) ?
And shall our forefathers too ( be raised ) ?
Say : Yes , ( of course , ) and you will be disgraced and humiliated ( as well ) .
So , it shall be merely a single Dreadful Shout ( of a stern call ) . So all will suddenly ( rise and ) start staring .
And they will say : Woe to us ! This is the Day of Requital .
( It will be said : Yes , ) this is the same Day of Judgment which you used to reject .
Assemble all those who committed injustice and their companions and followers and those ( false gods as well ) that they used to worship .
Besides Allah . Then take them to the path of Hell .
And halt them ( near the Passage ) ; they will be interrogated .
( It will be said to them : ) What has happened to you that you do not help one another ?
( What help can they provide ? ) For , in truth , they will be standing bending their necks Today .
And turning to one another , they will mutually question .
They will say : Surely it is you who used to come to us from the right side ( i . e . asserting on oath of being right ) .
( Their misleading leaders ) will say : The truth is that it was you yourselves who did not believe .
Nor did we have any authority ( and control ) over you . But you yourselves were a rebellious people .
So the Command of our Lord has been proved against us . ( Now ) we are about to taste ( the torment ) .
So we led you astray . Surely we ourselves had gone astray .
So on that Day they ( all ) will share the torment .
No doubt this is how We deal with the sinners .
Surely , they were such people that when it was said to them : There is no worthy of worship except Allah , they used to show arrogance .
And used to say : Are we going to forsake our gods for the sake of an insane poet ?
( He is neither an insane person nor a poet . ) He has rather brought the Truth ( Din [ Religion ] ) and confirmed the Messengers ( of Allah ) .
Verily , you are about to taste the painful torment .
And you will not be given ( any ) reward but for what you used to do .
( Yes , ) but those ( exalted and chosen ) servants of Allah who have divested themselves of ( their ill - commanding selves and its pursuits ) .
It is they for whom a special provision is appointed ( morning and evening ) .
Fruits ( of every kind ) . And they will be honoured and venerated .
( Abiding ) in Gardens of Bliss and Bounty .
( Making spiritual disclosures ) face to face on raised couches .
Round them will be passed cups of ( sacred ) over - flowing drink .
It will be sparkling white and superbly delicious , a treat for those who drink .
It will neither cause any vertigo nor do any harm , nor will they lose balance ( after drinking it ) .
And beside them will be ( sitting chaste women ) with downcast looks and wide beautiful eyes .
( Fair , white charming complexion , they will look ) as if they were eggs protected from dust .
Then those ( residents of Paradise ) will turn to one another and mutually inquire ( about well - being ) .
One ( of the participants in conversation ) will say ( to the other ) : There was an acquaintance of mine ( who disbelieved in the Hereafter ) .
He used to say ( to me ) : Are you ( also ) of those who confirm and firmly believe ( in these things ) ?
( That ) when we are dead and have become dust and bones , so shall we be requited ( in that condition ) ?
Then he ( the inmate of Paradise ) will say : Will you peep down to see ( him in which plight he is ) ?
Then on peeping down he will find him ( right ) in the middle of Hell .
( He ) will say ( to him ) : By my Lord , you had nearly ruined me .
And had it not been the favour of my Lord I ( too ) would have joined those who are brought ( for torment with you ) .
So ( the inmates of Paradise will gladly ask : ) Shall we not die now ?
Except for the first death ( which we have passed through and have reached here ) and shall we not be ever tormented ?
This is surely the supreme success .
For such ( a success ) the doers should do work .
Well ! Is the hospitality ( of Paradise ) better or the tree of Zaqqum ?
Undoubtedly We have made this ( tree ) a torment for the wrongdoers .
Truly this is a tree that springs out from the bottom of Hell .
The spikes of its fruit are as if heads of ( ugly ) satans .
So the inmates of Hell have to eat of it alone and have to fill their bellies with the same .
Then for sure there will be scalding water mixed ( with pus ) for them after ( eating , which will cut through the gut ) .
Then ( after eating ) surely they will return to Hell ( again ) .
Surely they found their ancestors misguided .
So they are made to rush on in their footsteps .
And in fact most of the former people ( also ) lost the straight path .
And surely We sent the Warners among them as well .
So see how was the end of those who were warned .
Except for the chosen and exalted servants of Allah .
And verily Nuh ( Noah ) cried to Us . So how excellent We are to respond to the prayers !
And We delivered him and his family from the ordeal .
And We made his offspring the only survivors .
And We made his virtuous remembrance endure among the successors ( i . e . the Messengers and their people ) .
Peace be on Nuh ( Noah ) in all the worlds .
Surely We requite the pious the same way .
He was indeed of Our servants blessed with ( perfect ) faith .
Then We drowned the others .
And verily of his party was Ibrahim ( [ Abraham ] as well , on him be peace ) .
When he appeared before his Lord with a purified and submissive heart .
He said to his father ( who was in fact his uncle and he used to call him father for he had brought him up ) and his people : What is it that you worship ?
Do you go for false gods besides Allah , inventing a false allegation ?
Well ! What do you think of the Lord of all the worlds ?
Then Ibrahim ( Abraham ) cast a look at the stars ( to put them in doubt ) .
And said : I am not well ( so cannot accompany you to the festival ) .
At that they turned their backs on him and left ( for the festival ) .
Then Ibrahim ( Abraham ) went up to their gods ( idols ) quietly and said to them : Do you not eat ?
What is the matter with you that you do not speak ?
Then Ibrahim ( Abraham ) began striking ( and breaking ) them with full force .
Then the people came to him running ( on returning from the festival ) .
Ibrahim ( Abraham ) said ( to them ) : Do you worship these ( non - living stones ) which you carve out yourselves .
While Allah has created you and ( all ) your works ?
They said : Raise for him a building ( to burn him ) , then cast him into the blazing fire ( in it ) .
So they attempted to play a trick against Ibrahim ( Abraham ) but We humiliated them ( when the fire eventually turned into a flower garden ) .
Then Ibrahim ( Abraham ) said : ( Emigrating , ) I am going to my Lord . He will certainly guide me . ( He immigrated to Syria ) .
( Reaching the sacred land , he prayed : ) O my Lord , bless me with ( a son , ) one of the pious .
So We gave him the good news of a very forbearing son ( Ismail [ Ishmael ] ) .
Then when ( Ismail [ Ishmael ] ) reached ( the age of ) the ability to run about with him , Ibrahim ( Abraham ) said : O my son , I have seen in a dream that I am sacrificing you . So think , what is your opinion ? Ismail ( Ishmael ) said : O my father , do that ( immediately ) which you are being commanded . If Allah wills , you will find me among the patient ( and steadfast ) .
So when both submitted ( to the will of Allah i . e . both surrendered to Allahs Command ) and Ibrahim ( Abraham ) laid him down on his forehead . ( The subsequent sight has not been described . )
And We called out to him : O Ibrahim ( Abraham ) !
( How wonderfully ) have you made your dream really true ! Surely We pay back the spiritually excellent the same way . ( So you are blessed with the prominence of Our closest friend . )
It was by far a great open trial .
And We ransomed him with a great sacrifice .
And We preserved his virtuous remembrance ( praise ) among the succeeding generations .
Peace be upon Ibrahim ( Abraham ) !
That is how We pay back those who are committed to spiritual excellence .
Surely he was of Our servants with ( perfect faith ) .
And ( after Ismail [ Ishmael ] ) We gave him the good news of Ishaq ( Isaac ) . He was ( also ) a Prophet , one of the most pious .
And We bestowed blessings on him and on Ishaq ( Isaac ) . And among their descendants are both the virtuous as well as those who expressly wrong themselves .
And surely We blessed Musa ( Moses ) and Harun ( Aaron ) as well with Our favours .
And We delivered them and their people from the ordeal .
And We helped them , so it was they who overmastered .
And We gave both of them the clear and enlightening Book ( the Torah ) .
And We guided them both to the straight path .
And We preserved their virtuous remembrance ( also ) among the succeeding generations .
Peace be upon Musa ( Moses ) and Harun ( Aaron ) !
That is how We pay back those who are committed to spiritual excellence .
Surely both of them were of Our servants blessed with ( perfect faith ) .
And indeed Ilyas ( Elias too ) was one of the Messengers .
When he said to his people : Do you not fear ( Allah ) ?
Do you worship ( the idol named ) Bal and turn away from the Best of creators .
Allah , Who is your Lord and the Lord of your foregoing ancestors ( as well ) ?
So they ( i . e . the people of Baalbak ) rejected Ilyas ( Elias ) , so they will ( also ) be brought ( to the torment of Hell ) .
Except the chosen servants of Allah .
And We preserved his virtuous remembrance ( also ) among the succeeding generations .
Peace be upon Ilyas ( Elias ) !
That is how We pay back those who are committed to spiritual excellence .
Surely he was of Our servants blessed with ( perfect faith ) .
And verily Lut ( Lot too ) was one of the Messengers .
When We delivered him and the whole of his family .
Except that old woman who was of those who stayed behind .
Then We destroyed the others .
And surely you pass by ( their ruined towns while going from Makka to Syria ) in the morning .
And at night as well . Do you not even then understand ?
And Yunus ( Jonah too ) was indeed one of the Messengers .
When he ran towards the full boat .
Then ( when it was caught into a whirlpool ) they cast lots and ( in the draws ) he came to be the loser ( i . e . his name was drawn and those in the boat threw him into the river ) .
Then the fish swallowed him and he was a ( self - condemning ) repentant .
Then if he had not been of those who glorify ( Allah ) .
He would have stayed in the belly ( of the fish ) till the Day when people will be resurrected ( from the graves ) .
Then We cast him onto a wide plain ( the beach ) while he was sick .
And We caused a creeping ( gourd ) plant to grow over him .
And We sent him towards ( the people of Nineveh on the land of Mosul , ) a population of a hundred thousand or more .
( Seeing the signs of torment , ) they believed . So We granted them prosperity for a time .
So ask these ( disbelievers of Makka ) : Are there daughters for your Lord and sons for them ?
Did We create the angels as females and were they present ( on the occasion ) ?
Listen ! They assuredly say ( this ) out of their fabrications .
That Allah has begotten children and surely they are liars .
Has He chosen daughters as compared to sons ? ( The creed of the disbelievers of Makka is being refuted in the language of their logic and mentality . )
What is the matter with you ? How do you judge ?
Do you not ponder ?
Do you have any clear proof ( to establish your philosophy and ideology ) ?
Produce your book if you are truthful .
And they have fabricated a blood relationship between Allah and the jinn ( as well ) , whereas the jinn know that they ( too ) will be made to appear ( before the Presence of Allah ) .
Holy is Allah , Transcendent of what they utter .
But the chosen and exalted servants of Allah ( do not say such things ; they are not among them ) .
So you and ( the idols ) which you worship .
You all cannot misguide ( anyone against Allah ) .
Except the one who is bound to fall into Hell .
( And the angels say : ) Everyone of us has an appointed station .
And surely we ourselves are those who remain standing in rows .
And surely we ourselves remain engaged in glorifying ( Allah ) .
And no doubt these people used to say .
If we ( too ) had some ( Book ) of direction and guidance from the bygone people .
Then certainly we ( too ) would have been Allahs exalted servants .
But ( now ) they have rejected this ( Quran ) . So they will soon come to know ( their end ) .
And verily Our Command has been put into effect in respect of the servants whom We sent ( i . e . the Messengers ) .
That it is they who have been granted help .
And that essentially it is only Our army that is going to dominate .
So turn your attention away from them for a time .
And keep watching them ( constantly ) . So they will soon come to know ( their end ) .
And do they want Our punishment to be hastened ?
But when that ( torment ) descends before them , how evil will be the morning of those who were warned !
So turn your attention away from them for a while .
And keep watching them ( constantly ) . So they will soon come to know ( their end ) .
Holy is your Lord , the Lord of Honour , Transcendent of these ( things ) which they utter .
And peace be upon ( all ) the Messengers !
And all praise be to Allah alone , the Lord of all the worlds .
Sad . ( Only Allah and the Messenger [ blessings and peace be upon him ] know the real meaning . ) By the Holy Quran , full of direction and guidance .
But the disbelievers are in ( the trouble of undue and unjust ) conceit and arrogance , ( suffering from ) opposition and enmity ( against Our Esteemed Prophet ) .
How many a community We have destroyed before them ! And they started crying ( on seeing the torment ) , when there was no time left for deliverance ( and release ) .
And they wondered that a Warner had come to them from among themselves and the disbelievers said : He is a magician , a great liar .
Has he turned all the gods into one God ? That is indeed a very strange thing !
And their chiefs ( stood up terminating their meeting with the Holy Prophet at Abu Talibs house ) and walked out saying ( to the rest of the people ) : You also walk out and be firm - footed in ( worshipping ) your gods . There is for sure some motive ( and purpose ) behind it .
We have not heard of this ( belief in the Oneness of God ) even among the last community ( of Christianity or the religion of Quraysh ) . This is but a fabricated lie .
Has this Admonition ( the Quran ) been sent down to him alone out of all of us ? To be more precise , they are ( caught ) in doubt about My Admonition . But in truth they have not yet tasted My torment .
Do they have the treasures of the Mercy of your Lord , Who is Almighty , the Most Benevolent ?
Or do they possess the kingdom of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them ? ( If so , ) then they should tie up ropes and climb up ( to heaven ) .
They are just a worthless army of the armies ( of the disbelievers ) that is about to be badly defeated at this very place .
Before them the people of Nuh ( Noah ) and Ad and ( also ) Pharaoh , the powerful king ( who tortured with stakes ) , belied and disbelieved .
And Thamud and the people of Lut ( Lot ) and the dwellers of ( the Wood ) al - Aika ( i . e . the people of Shuaib ) too ( denied ) . These were the large armies .
Each ( one of these ) people rejected the Messengers and My torment became inevitable ( for them ) .
And all of them are waiting for a single Mighty Blast ( Shout ) in which there will be no deferment .
And they say : O our Lord , give us hastily our share even before the Day of Reckoning .
( O My Esteemed Beloved ! ) Continue observing patience with what they say and remember Our servant Dawud ( David ) , who had great power . Certainly he was ever - turning ( to Us in repentance ) .
Indeed We put mountains under his command which ( joining him ) used to glorify Me evening and morning .
And the birds also that used to flock ( in his presence ) , each would turn towards him ( seeking to obey his commands ) .
And We strengthened and stabilized his state and regime , and blessed him with wisdom , insight and a decisive ( and distinctive ) oratory .
And has the news of the contenders reached you when they jumped over the wall and entered the chamber of worship ( of Dawud [ David ] ) ?
When they came inside to Dawud ( David ) , he felt nervous . They said : Do not feel upset . We are two parties in a dispute . One of us has wronged the other . So judge between us with truth and justice , and do not exceed limits , and lead us towards the right path .
Surely , he is my brother ; he has ninety - nine ewes and I have only one ewe . Yet he says : Give it ( also ) to me , and he suppresses me in conversation ( as well ) .
Dawud ( David ) said : He has done you a wrong in demanding your ewe to add to his own ewes , and it is true that most of the partners wrong one another except those who believe and do pious deeds , and such people are very few . And it occurred to Dawud ( David ) that We had put him to trial ( through that dispute ) . So he prayed for forgiveness from his Lord and fell down prostrate and turned ( to Allah ) in repentance .
So We granted him forgiveness and surely he enjoys special nearness in Our Presence and an exalted position ( in the Hereafter ) .
O Dawud ( David ) ! Verily We have made you ( Our ) vicegerent in the earth . So judge between the people ( or rule ) with Truth and Justice . And do not follow your desire or ( this following the desire ) shall turn you away from the path of Allah . Surely those who turn away from the path of Allah , for them is severe punishment because they forget the Day of Reckoning .
And We have not created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them without any purpose and good reason . It is the view and concept of the disbelievers ( that this is a purposeless creation that came about by chance ) . So for disbelievers there is torment of the Fire of Hell .
Shall We make those who have believed and do constructive works like those who corrupt the earth with destructive works , or shall We make the pious like the wicked ?
This is a Blessed Book that We have revealed to you so that the wise may ponder over its Verses and seek direction and guidance .
And We blessed Dawud ( David ) with ( a son ) Sulaiman ( Solomon ) . How excellent a servant was he ! He is indeed oft - returning to Allah in repentance .
When swift horses of fine breed were presented to him in the evening .
He said ( remorsefully ) : I have committed love for wealth ( i . e . horses ) more than the love for the remembrance of my Lord until ( the sun ) disappeared behind the veil ( of night ) .
He said : Bring them ( horses ) back to me . So he cut away their legs and necks ( with a sword and thus he slaughtered his love for a position of nearness to Allah ) .
And indeed We put Sulaiman ( Solomon also ) to trial and placed an ( unusually created ) body on his throne . Then he regained ( the regime ) .
He submitted : O my Lord , forgive me and bestow on me such a reign that no one may have after me . Surely You are Most Benevolent .
Then We caused the wind to obey him . It used to blow gently under his command wherever he would desire ( it ) to go .
And all the jinn ( and devils were also subdued to him ) and every architect and diver ( too ) .
And ( also ) other jinn bound in chains .
( Allah said : ) This is Our Bestowal . ( Whether you ) confer ( it ) on others or hold back ( to you ) , no account will be asked for ( in both the cases ) .
And surely he enjoys exclusive nearness in Our Presence and an exalted position in the Hereafter .
And mention Our servant Ayyub ( Job ) when he cried to his Lord : Satan has afflicted me with great torture and suffering .
( Allah said : ) Strike the ground with your foot . Here is a spring ( of cool water ) to bathe and drink .
And We gave him his family and as many more ( members of family ) along with them , as a special Mercy from Us and as advice for the wise .
( O Ayyub [ Job ] ! ) Take a broom of ( hundred ) twigs in your hand and strike ( your wife once ) with that ( to fulfil your oath ) , and do not break your oath . Surely We found him steadfast . How excellent a servant was ( Ayyub [ Job ] ) ! Surely he was oft - returning ( to Us ) in repentance .
And mention Our servants Ibrahim ( Abraham ) and Ishaq ( Isaac ) and Yaqub ( Jacob ) , who wielded great power and possessed vision .
Surely We chose them for an exclusive ( characteristic of ) the remembrance of the home in the Hereafter .
And verily in Our Sight they were of the chosen , exalted ( and ) most liked servants .
And ( also ) mention Ismail ( Ishmael ) and al - Yasa ( Isaaiah ) and Dhul - Kifl ( Ezekiel ) . All of them were of the chosen ones .
This is the direction and guidance ( which is cited in the first Verse of this Sura ) . And surely for the God - fearing there is a blessed abode .
( They are ) the Gardens of Eden to live in forever . Their doors will be opened for them .
There , reclining on cushions , they will be sitting ( on couches ) , calling ( at intervals ) for plenteous fine fruits and ( delicious ) drinks .
And beside them will be pure women ( houris ) with eyes downcast ( chastity conscious ) and of equal age .
These are the blessings which you are promised for the Day of Reckoning .
Surely this is Our provision which is never to exhaust .
This ( is for the believers ) , and surely for the defiant there is an extremely evil abode .
( That is ) Hell which they will enter and that is extremely evil bedding .
This ( is punishment ) ; so they should taste it : boiling water and pus .
And there is also a variety of ( torments of ) similar nature .
( The Guards of Hell or the inmates of Hell already there will say : ) This is an ( other ) army which is rushing into Hell along with you . There is no welcome for them . Surely they ( too ) are about to enter Hell .
They ( the arrivals ) will say : In fact it is you to whom may there be no reception ! It is but you who brought to us this ( disbelief and torment ) . So ( this ) is an evil resting place .
They will say : O our Lord , the one who brought for us this ( disbelief or torment ) , increase his torment in Hell twofold .
And they will say : What is the matter with us that we do not see ( those ) persons ( here ) we used to count among the evil people ?
Did we use to scoff at them ( unjustly ) or did our eyes miss ( to recognize ) them ? ( These were the sold - to - God souls like Ammar , Khubab , Suhaib , Bilal and Salman , may Allah be well pleased with all of them . )
Surely , this mutual dispute of the inmates of Hell is true .
Say : I am only a Warner and there is no God except Allah , the One , the All - Dominant .
The Lord of the heavens and the earth and ( all ) what is between the two , Almighty , Most Forgiving .
Say : That ( Day of Rising ) is the tremendous piece of news .
You have turned your faces away from it .
I did not know of the Supreme Assembly ( of angels on my own ) when they were holding discussions ( about the creation of Adam ) .
The only Revelation that is sent to me ( from Allah ) is but I am a clear and straight Warner .
( Recall that occasion ) when your Lord said to the angels : I am about to create a human organism from ( moist ) clay .
Then when I perfect its ( visible body ) and blow into its ( invisible ) self My Own ( illumining ) spirit , fall down prostrate before him ( in his honour ) .
So all the angels fell down together prostrating themselves before him .
Except Iblis . He showed arrogance ( against the dignity of the Prophet ) and became one of the disbelievers .
( Allah ) said : O Iblis , what has prevented you from falling down prostrate before his ( Exalted Person ) whom I have created with My Own ( Benevolent ) Hand ? Did you show arrogance ( to him ) or were you ( presuming yourself ) high ranking ?
( Comparing himself with the Prophet , ) he said : I am better than he . You have created me from fire and You have created him from clay .
Allah said : So get out from here ( for the sin of insolence against the Prophet ) . Surely you are rejected .
And surely My curse is on you till the Day of Resurrection .
He said : O Lord , then give me respite ( to remain alive ) till the Day when they are raised alive from the graves .
Allah said : ( Be off , ) you are surely of those who are granted respite .
Till the Day of the time which is appointed ( and known ) .
He said : By Your Honour , I shall certainly turn all of them away from the straight path with persistence .
Except those of Your servants who are chosen and exalted ones .
Allah said : So the Truth is ( this ) , and the Truth I say .
That I will fill Hell with you and with all those who will follow your ( denigrating mindset ) .
Say : I do not ask you for any reward for this ( i . e . preaching of the Truth ) , nor am I of those who pretend .
This ( Quran ) is only direction and guidance for the whole world .
And you will yourselves come to know its Truth after a while .
The revelation of this Book is from Allah , the Lord of Honour , All - Wise .
Surely We have revealed ( this ) Book to you with the Truth . So worship Allah for His sake alone in sincere obedience .
( Say to the people : ) Listen , sincere obedience and worship is only Allahs due . And those ( disbelievers ) who have taken ( idols as ) helpers other than Allah ( say in false justification of their idol - worship : ) We worship them only that they may bring us near to Allah . Surely Allah will judge between them concerning the matter in which they differ . Certainly Allah does not give him guidance who is a liar , very ungrateful .
Had Allah willed to beget children ( for Himself ) , He would have chosen whom He liked out of His Creation . Glory be to Him , He is Allah , the One , the All - Dominant .
He created the heavens and the earth with a zero - defect strategy and planning . He causes the night to overlap the day and the day to overlap the night . And He is the One Who has subjected the sun and the moon ( to a system ) . Each ( star and planet ) rotates in its orbit till an appointed time . Beware ! He is the One Who is All - Dominant ( over the entire system ) , Most Forgiving .
He has created all of you from a single life cell , and then made from it a similar pair . And then He brought about for you eight living animals in pairs . He shapes you in the wombs of your mothers from one creative phase into the next in sequence and ( completes this process ) in three ( germinal ) layers . This is Allah , your Lord , to Whom belongs all Power and Authority . There is no God except He . Where then are you deviated ( and disoriented after knowing these concealed realities of Creation ) ?
If you disbelieve then surely Allah is Self - Sufficient and He does not like disbelief ( and ingratitude ) for His servants and if you give thanks , ( so ) He likes it for you . And no bearer of burden will bear the burden of any other . Then you have to return to your Lord . Then He will inform you of the deeds which you used to do . Surely He knows best ( even ) the secrets of the hearts .
And when some suffering afflicts man he turns towards his Lord and cries out . Then when ( Allah ) grants him some blessing from Himself , he forgets that ( suffering ) he used to beseech relief from . And ( then ) he sets up ( idols ) as partners with Allah to make ( others also ) lose His Way . Say : ( O disbeliever , ) profit a little ( worldly gain ) from your disbelief ; you are for sure of the inmates of Hell .
Well ! ( Is this polytheist better or ) that ( believer ) who worships during the hours of the night standing and in prostration , lives in fear of the Hereafter and expects Mercy from his Lord ? Say : Can those who have knowledge and those who do not have ( all ) be alike ? So only the wise do receive the admonition .
( O Beloved , say from My side : ) O My servants , you who have believed , adopt Godwariness ; it is for these men of spiritual excellence in this world that there is excellent reward . And Allahs earth is vast . So the steadfast will certainly be given their reward without measure .
Say : I have been commanded to worship Allah in sincerest obedience and devotion to Him alone .
And I was ( also ) commanded to become the first Muslim of all ( His Creation ) .
Say : If I disobeyed My Lord , I would fear the torment of a Terrible Day .
Say : I worship Allah alone making obedience purely for Him .
So worship what you like besides Allah . Say : Surely losers are only those who will bring loss to their own souls and their families on the Day of Resurrection . Remember ! That truly is the manifest loss .
For them there will be clouds of fire ( as covers ) over them and pavements of fire beneath them too . This is ( the torment ) with which Allah warns His servants . O My servants ! Always fear Me .
And those who remained intact from idol - worship and turned towards Allah , for them is good news . So give glad tidings to My servants .
Those who listen attentively to what is said , then follow the best in it , it is they whom Allah has given guidance and it is they who have wisdom .
Well , can you save him for whom the Command of torment has become due and who has become the inmate of Hell ( for ever ) ?
But for those who fear their Lord are lofty palaces ( in Paradise ) with lofty mansions built over and rivers flowing beneath . This is Allahs promise . Allah does not go against His promise .
( O man ! ) Have you not seen that Allah showered water from the sky , then made it sprout from the earth as water springs ? Then He brings forth with it crops of various colours . Then ( growing fully ) it dries up . Then , ( ripening , ) you see it turns yellow . Then He reduces it to broken straw . Surely there is advice in it for the wise .
Well , he whose breast Allah has opened for Islam is ( stationed ) in the light from his Lord . ( But on the contrary ) they whose hearts are hardened for ( being deprived of the Bounty of ) Allahs remembrance are destined to ruin . It is they who are in open error .
Allah is the One Who has sent down the best Word .
That is a Book whose contents are in harmony with one another ( in format and meaning ) and ( whose Verses ) are repeated frequently .
It sends a hair - raising shudder in the bodies of those who fear their Lord .
Then their skins and hearts get softened and they get ( lost ) into the Remembrance of Allah ( in a weeping mood ) .
It is guidance from Allah and He guides with it whom He wills .
And he whom Allah holds misguided ( i . e . leaves astray ) has no one to guide him .
Well , on the Day of Resurrection , ( what will be his plight ) who will be trying to halt the evil torment ( of the Fire ) with his face ( because both his hands will be fastened ) ? And it will be said to these wrongdoers : Taste the consequence of the evil deeds that you used to do .
The people who passed before them rejected ( the Messengers ) , so the torment came upon them from where they had no perception .
So Allah made them taste disgrace and humiliation ( here ) in this world and surely the torment of the Hereafter is far greater . Would that they knew !
And truly , ( to make the people understand , ) We have given every kind of example in this Quran in order that they may take advice .
The Quran is in the Arabic language ( which is the most comprehensive , lucid and communicative of all the languages ) in which there is not even a bit of crookedness so that they may adopt Godwariness .
Allah has given an example of such a ( slave ) person that is owned by many partners who are ill - mannered and mutually quarrelsome as well . And ( on the other side ) there is a person who is a slave only to one master . Can they both be alike ? ( Not at all ! ) All praise belongs to Allah alone . But most of them do not know ( the Truth of the Oneness of Allah ) .
( O My Esteemed Beloved ! ) Surely you will pass away ( only to taste death ) but they will certainly die ( for everlasting death . So the difference between the two deaths will be worth seeing ) .
Then certainly on the Day of Resurrection you will dispute with one another in the Presence of your Lord . ( One party will say to the other : You stopped us from understanding the station of the Prophet and the glory of the Messenger . They will reply : No , you were yourselves ill - fated and misguided . )
So who is more unjust than he who invents lies against Allah and denies the Truth when it comes to him ? Is not the abode for disbelievers in Hell ?
And whoever has brought the Truth and he who has confirmed it , it is they who are Godfearing .
( All ) those ( favours ) which they will long for ( are in store ) for them with their Lord . This is the reward of those who are committed to ( piousness and ) spiritual excellence .
So that Allah may remove from them errors which they did and may grant them the reward for the pious deeds they used to do .
Is Allah not enough for His ( most intimate ) servant ( the Esteemed Holy Prophet [ blessings and peace be upon him ] ) ? And these ( disbelievers ) frighten you , apart from Allah , with the idols ( which they worship ) . And there is no one to guide him whom Allah holds astray ( owing to his denial to believe the Truth ) .
And he whom Allah blesses with guidance , there is none to misguide him . Is Allah not Almighty , the Lord of Vengeance ?
And if you ask them : Who has created the heavens and the earth ? they will certainly say : Allah . Say : Well , state , can the idols that you worship besides Allah remove the suffering which Allah may intend to inflict upon me , or if Allah intends to grant me Mercy , can they ( idols ) stop that Mercy ( sent by Him ) ? Say : Allah is Sufficient for me . The trusting ones put their trust in Him alone .
Say : O ( my ) people ! Carry on working according to your way ; I am working ( according to my way ) . Then you will soon know ( the end ) .
( That ) who it is upon whom comes the torment which will disgrace him . And everlasting torment will come down upon him .
Surely , We revealed the Book to you with the Truth for ( the guidance of ) people . So he who takes guidance takes for his own benefit , and he who goes astray , so he strays to his own detriment . And you are not responsible for them .
Allah takes away souls at the time of their death and those whose death has not yet arrived during their sleep . Then He withholds those souls whose death He has ordained and sets other ( souls ) free till an appointed time . Surely in it are Signs for those who contemplate .
Have they taken ( idols as ) intercessors against Allahs leave ? Say : Even though they do not own anything , nor do they have any reason ?
Say : ( The leave for ) all intercession rests with Allah alone ( which He has specified for His intimate servants ) . The Sovereignty of the heavens and the earth also belongs to Him alone . Then to Him you will be returned .
And when solely Allah is mentioned , the hearts of those who do not believe in the Hereafter constrict and recoil with disgust , and when the idols ( that they worship ) are mentioned apart from Allah , they rejoice all of a sudden .
Submit : O Allah ! Originator of the heavens and the earth ! Knower of the unseen and the seen ! You alone will judge between Your servants those ( matters ) in which they used to disagree .
And if the wrongdoers possessed all ( the wealth and assets ) that are on earth and ( obtained ) the same again in addition , they would ransom themselves with it ( for deliverance ) from the evil torment on the Day of Resurrection . But there shall appear to them from Allah such a torment as they could never have even imagined .
And there will appear to them ( all ) the evildoings which they have earned , and that ( torment ) will encompass them which they used to laugh at .
When some suffering touches man , he cries to Us . But when We grant him some favour from Us he starts saying : This favour has come to me on ( the basis of my own ) knowledge and planning . In fact it is a trial but most of them do not know .
In truth those who have passed away before them also used to say the same ( things ) . So whatever they earned could not benefit them .
And the evil deeds which they had done fell upon them , and those of them who are engaged in doing wrongs their evil works will ( also ) catch up with them soon that they have earned , and they cannot prevent ( Allah ) .
And do they not know that Allah gives abundantly to whom He wills and sparingly ( to whom He wills ) ? Surely in that are Signs for those who ( truly ) believe .
Say : O servants of Mine who have wronged their souls , do not lose hope of Allahs Mercy . Assuredly , Allah forgives all sins ( and excesses ) . He is certainly Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
And turn to your Lord in repentance and total submission and become thoroughly obedient to Him before the torment comes upon you . Then you will not be helped at all .
And follow the Excellent ( Book ) that has been revealed to you by your Lord before the torment suddenly comes upon you and you are simply unaware .
( Lest ) someone should say : Alas ! Grief on my lapse and omission in respect of my duty ( of obedience ) to Allah and I was certainly among those who mocked .
Or should say : If Allah had given me guidance , I would certainly have been of the righteous .
Or should say on seeing the torment : Could I return to the world but only once , I would then become one among the pious .
( The Lord will say : ) Yes , no doubt , My Revelations came to you . So you rejected them and showed arrogance and became one of the disbelievers .
And those who have fabricated a lie against Allah you will see them on the Day of Resurrection that their faces are turned black . Is the abode of the arrogant not in Hell ?
And those who have adopted Godwariness Allah will deliver them bestowing success on them . No evil will touch them , nor will they grieve at all .
Allah is the Creator of everything and He is Ever - Watchful over everything .
To Him alone belong the keys of the heavens and the earth and those who disbelieve in the Revelations of Allah , it is they who are the losers .
Say : O you ignoramuses , do you ask me to worship someone other than Allah ?
And in truth ( this ) revelation has been sent to you and to those ( Messengers as well ) who were ( raised ) before you : ( O man , ) if you associate partners with Allah then all your works will go to waste and you will certainly be among the losers .
So , worship Allah and be among the thankful .
And they did not realize true appreciation and veneration of Allahs Glory as the appreciation and veneration of His Glory was due . And the whole earth will be in His grip on the Day of Resurrection and all the heavenly spheres will be rolled up in His right hand ( i . e . firm hold of His Might ) . Holy is He and High and Exalted above all what they associate with him .
And the Trumpet will be blown . Then all the people that are in the heavens and that are in the earth will become senseless except him whom Allah wills . Then the Trumpet will be blown again ; so they will stand up gazing all at once .
And the earth ( on the Day of Judgment ) will be illumined with the Light of its Lord and the Book ( of everyones deeds ) will be laid down . And the Prophets and the witnesses will be brought and judgment will be given between the people with truth and justice . And they will not be done any wrong .
And everyone will be given recompense in full for his doings and He Knows full well what they do .
And those who have disbelieved will be driven to Hell in groups until , when they approach it ( Hell ) , its gates will be opened and its keepers will say to them : Did Messengers not come to you from among yourselves who recited to you the Verses of your Lord and warned you of this Days appearance ? They ( the inmates of Hell ) will say : Yes , ( they came ) . But the command of torment would have been carried out against the disbelievers .
It will be said to them : Enter the gates of Hell . ( You ) will live in it for ever . So how evil is the abode of the arrogant !
And those who persisted in fear of Allah will ( also ) be conducted to Paradise in groups , until when they approach it ( Paradise ) , its doors will have been opened for them ( well before ) and the keepers of Paradise will say ( greeting them ) : Peace be upon you ! Be you glad and rejoicing , so enter it to live here forever .
And they ( the residents of Paradise ) will say : All praise belongs to Allah alone Who has fulfilled His promise to us and has made us inheritors of the land of Paradise that we may reside in ( this ) Paradise wherever we desire . So how excellent is the reward of those who put piousness to work !
And , ( O Beloved , ) you will see the angels all around the Throne in circles glorifying the Lord with His praise and the judgment will be given among ( all ) the people with the truth and justice and it will be announced : All praise belongs to Allah alone , the Sustainer of all the worlds .
Ha , Mim . ( Only Allah and the Messenger [ blessings and peace be upon him ] know the real meaning . )
The Revelation of this Book is from Allah , Almighty , All - Knowing .
The Forgiver of sin , the Acceptor of repentance , the Severe in tormenting , the Lord of Bounty ; there is no God but He ; towards Him have ( all ) to return .
No one disputes about the Revelations of Allah except those who do not believe . So let not their moving about ( freely ) in the cities delude you .
Before them the people of Nuh ( Noah ) and after them many ( other ) communities rejected ( their Messengers ) . And every people intended to seize its Messenger ( to assassinate or imprison him ) and raised dispute through baseless issues to dilute ( the influence of ) the Truth by means of that ( dispute ) . So I seized them ( in torment ) . So how was ( My ) torment !
That is how the judgment of your Lord was fulfilled against those who disbelieved . Surely they are the inmates of Hell .
The angels who are bearing the Throne and those who are around it , ( all ) glorify their Lord with His praise and believe in Him and pray for forgiveness of the believers ( and submit ) : O our Lord , You encompass everything in ( Your ) Mercy and Knowledge . So forgive those who turn to You in repentance and follow Your path and protect them from the torment of Hell .
O our Lord ! And admit them to the Gardens of Eden ( for eternal living ) You have promised them . And ( with them admit also ) the pious ones of their fathers and their wives and their children . Surely You are Almighty , Most Wise .
And save them from ( the punishment of ) sins . And the one You saved from ( the punishment of ) sins that Day , You have indeed shown him great Mercy . And that is great success indeed .
Surely the disbelievers will be called out and addressed : ( Today ) Allahs displeasure with you is greater than your own disgust for yourselves while you used to deny when called to believe .
They will say : O our Lord , You have caused us to die twice and You have ( also ) given us life twice . ( Now ) we confess our sins . So is there any way out ( to escape from this chastisement ) ?
( It will be said to them : No , ) this ( eternal punishment ) is due to the reason that when solely Allah was called upon you used to deny , but when ( something ) was associated with Him , you used to believe . So ( now ) the Command is Allahs alone , Who is Most High , Supreme .
He is the One Who shows you His Signs and sends down sustenance for you from the heaven . And only he who remains inclined ( to Allah alone ) accepts advice .
So worship Allah for His own sake in sincere obedience and true devotion , even though the disbelievers may despise it .
The Exalter of Ranks and the Owner of the Mighty Throne , He sends His Spirit ( i . e . Revelation ) upon whoever of His servants He wills by His Command , so that He may warn them ( people ) of the Day of Assembly .
The Day when they all will come forth ( from the graves ) , and nothing of their ( deeds ) will remain hidden from Allah . ( Allah will say : ) Whose is the Kingdom this Day ? ( It will be further added : ) It belongs to Allah , the One , the Most Dominant .
Today every soul will be rewarded for what it has earned . There will be no injustice Today . Surely Allah is Swift in taking an account .
And warn them of the Day of impending calamity when hearts will rise to throats due to the suppressed grief . The wrongdoers will have neither any kind friend nor any influential intercessor .
He knows the treacherous eyes and also those secrets which the breasts hide ( inside them ) .
And Allah judges with truth , and the ( idols ) they worship other than Allah can judge nothing at all . Surely Allah is the One Who is All - Hearing , All - Seeing .
And have they not travelled in the land so that they could see what was the end of those who were before them ? They were far mightier in power than these and ( also ) greater in their remains and signs ( which they left behind ) in the earth . Then Allah seized them for their sins and there was none to protect them from ( the torment of ) Allah .
That was because their Messengers brought them open Signs but they denied . So Allah seized them ( in the torment ) . Surely He is All - Powerful , Most Severe in punishing .
And indeed We sent Musa ( Moses ) with Our Signs and clear authority .
Towards Pharaoh , Haman and Qarun but they said : He is a sorcerer , a great liar .
Then when he came to them with the message of Truth from Us , they said : Kill the sons of those who have believed with him but leave their women alive . And the treacherous plots of the disbelievers were nothing but ruination .
And Pharaoh said : Leave me to kill Musa ( Moses ) and let him call his Lord . I fear he will change your religion or will spread violence in the country ( Egypt ) .
And Musa ( Moses ) said : I have taken refuge with my Lord and your Lord from every arrogant character who does not believe in the Day of Reckoning .
And a believing man from among the people of Pharaoh who had kept his faith secret said , Do you kill a man ( just ) because he says : Allah is my Lord ? And he has brought you clear Signs from your Lord .
And if ( suppose ) he is a liar then the burden of his lie will fall back on him alone , but if he is truthful then as much torment is bound to seize you as he has promised you .
Surely Allah does not give guidance to someone who exceeds limits and is a downright liar .
O my people ! You are in power today ; ( it is you who ) are ruling over the land ( of Egypt ) . But who can save us from the torment of Allah if that ( torment ) comes upon us ? Pharaoh said : I instruct you only what I myself deem ( correct ) , and I do not show you ( any path ) except the path of righteousness .
And he who had embraced faith said : O my people , I fear ( the torment of ) an evil day coming upon you ( too ) like the day that seized ( the former ) generations .
On the pattern of the punishment of the People of Nuh ( Noah ) , Ad and Thamud and the later communities . And Allah does not intend any injustice to ( His ) servants .
And , O people , I fear for you a Day of hue and cry ( i . e . the Day of Rising ) .
The Day when you will turn your backs and flee away and there will be no one to save you from ( the torment of ) Allah and for him whom Allah holds astray there is no guide or leader .
And , ( O people of Egypt , ) no doubt Yusuf ( Joseph ) came to you with clear Signs before this . And you always remained doubtful about those ( Signs ) which he brought to you until when he passed away , you started saying : Now Allah will never send any Messenger after him . In like manner Allah holds one astray who is a transgressor and a sceptic .
Those who argue about the Revelations of Allah without any proof that has come to them , ( their argumentation ) is awfully displeasing in the sight of Allah and in the sight of believers . That is how Allah seals up the heart of every arrogant ( and ) tyrant .
And Pharaoh said : O Haman , build me a towering palace so that ( climbing it ) I may reach the tracts .
The tracts to the heavens ; then I may peep and glance at the God of Musa ( Moses ) ; and I consider him but a liar . And in this way the evil conduct of Pharaoh was made charming for him and he was hindered from the path ( of Allah ) . And the treacherous plan of Pharaoh was merely a catastrophe .
And the man who had believed said : O my people , follow me , I will lead you to the path of guidance and piousness .
O my people ! The life of this world is nothing but ( a few days ) gain and the Hereafter is certainly a home to live in forever .
He who commits evil will not be rewarded but with the same measure . And whoever behaves piously , whether male or female , and is a believer as well , it is they who will enter Paradise . There they will be given sustenance without measure .
And , O my people , what has happened to me that I call you to salvation and you call me to Hell ?
You invite me to deny Allah and associate with Him that of which I have no knowledge , while I invite you to the Almighty God Who is Most Forgiving .
The Truth is that what you are calling me to is not worth calling either in this world or in the Hereafter . And surely our return is to Allah alone , and certainly those who transgress are the inmates of Hell .
So you will soon recall ( these words ) that I am saying to you . And I consign my affair to Allah . Surely Allah is Ever - Watchful of the servants .
Then Allah safeguarded him against their evils which they were planning . And an evil torment engulfed the people of Pharaoh .
They are brought before the Fire of Hell morning and evening . And the Day when Resurrection occurs ( a Voice will command : ) Cast the people of Pharaoh into the most miserable chastisement .
And when they will fall out with one another in Hell , the weak will say to those who used to show arrogance ( in the world ) : We were your followers , so can you remove from us ( even ) a portion of the Fire of Hell ?
Those who practised arrogance will say : We all are doomed in the same Hell ; surely Allah has given His final judgment among the servants .
And those burning in the Fire will say to the keepers of Hell : Pray to your Lord that He may lessen our torment some day .
They will say : Did your Messengers not come to you with clear Signs ? They will reply : Yes , of course . ( Then the keepers ) will say : So pray yourselves . But the disbelievers prayer will ( always ) be in vain .
Surely We help Our Messengers and those who believe , in the life of this world and ( will also help ) on the Day when the witnesses will rise .
The Day when the excuse of the wrongdoers will not benefit them . And there will be curse on them , and for them will be the evil home ( in Hell ) .
And verily We gave Musa ( [ Moses ] the Book ) of guidance and ( after him ) We made the Children of Israel the inheritors of that ( Book ) .
Guidance and a Reminder for those who possess wisdom .
So keep patience . Assuredly the Promise of Allah is true . And ask forgiveness for the sins of your Umma ( Community ) and glorify your Lord with His praise in the evening and in the morning .
Surely those who argue about the Revelations of Allah without any authority having come to them , there is nothing in their breasts except vain superiority ; they will never be able to attain to that ( true superiority ) . So keep seeking refuge with Allah ( from their evil ) . Surely He alone is All - Hearing , All - Seeing .
Surely the creation of the heavens and the earth is far greater than the creation of mankind but most people do not know .
And the blind and the seeing cannot be equal . So ( in the same way ) those who believe and do righteous works and the evildoers too cannot be ( alike ) . You accept direction and guidance but little .
Surely the Last Hour is bound to come . There is no doubt in that . Yet most people do not believe .
And your Lord has said : Always pray to Me ; I shall certainly grant your prayer . Surely those who turn away from My worship in defiance will soon enter Hell disgraced .
Allah is the One Who has made the night for you to repose in and brightened the day to see ; surely Allah is Bountiful to mankind but most people do not give thanks .
That is Allah , your Lord , Who is the Creator of everything . There is no God apart from Him . So where are you wandering disorientated ?
Likewise were wandering distracted those who used to deny the Revelations of Allah .
Allah is the One Who made the earth a dwelling place for you and the heaven a ceiling and gave you form and features and then perfected your shapes and granted you sustenance of pure things . Such is Allah , your Lord . So Blessed is Allah , the Lord of all the worlds .
He is the Ever - Living . There is no God but He . So worship Him making obedience and devotion sincerely His . All praise belongs to Allah alone , the Lord of all the worlds .
Say : I have been forbidden to worship those idols that you worship apart from Allah whereas manifest Signs have come to me from my Lord and I have been commanded to obey the Lord of all the worlds .
He is the One Who initiated ( the genesis of ) your ( chemical life ) from clay , then ( your biological genesis ) from a sperm drop ( zygote ) , then from a hanging mass ( in the mothers womb ) . Then ( eventually ) He is the One Who brings you forth as an infant then ( nourishes you ) , so that you may reach your maturity . ( Then He grants you a period of life , ) so that you may grow old . And some of you die early ( before senility ) . And ( the purpose of all this is ) that you may complete your respective appointed terms and ( also ) that you may comprehend .
He is the One Who gives life and causes death . Then when He decides upon a thing He says to it only : Be , so it becomes .
Have you not seen those who argue about the Revelations of Allah ? Where are they straying ?
Those who have rejected the Book ( as well as ) the Signs with which We sent Our Messengers , they will know ( their end ) soon .
When they have iron collars round their necks and chains , and they will be dragged away .
Into the boiling water and then will be thrown into the Fire as fuel .
Then it will be said to them : Where are those ( idols ) which you used to set up as partners .
Apart from Allah ? They will say : They have been lost from us . In fact we never worshipped anything before . That is how Allah holds the disbelievers astray .
This ( punishment ) is the requital of your undue rejoicing in the earth and the recompense of your gloating .
Enter the gates of Hell . You will live in it forever . So how evil is the abode of the arrogant !
So keep patience . Surely Allahs promise is true . Then whether We show you a portion of that ( torment ) which We have promised them or make you depart from visible life before that , ( in both cases ) they will be returned to Us .
And no doubt We sent many Messengers before you . We have given you an account of some of them while We have not ( yet ) narrated to you the annals of some others . And it was not possible for any Messenger to bring any Sign without Allahs leave . Then when the command of Allah came ( and ) the judgment was given with truth and justice the exponents of evil went into loss .
Allah is the One Who has created cattle for you so that you may ride some of them and some of them you eat .
And in them are for you other benefits too . So you may ride them ( further ) to reach that desired ( place ) which is ( determined ) in your hearts , and ( that ) you are borne on them and the boats .
And He shows you ( many of ) His Signs . So which of Allahs Signs will you deny ?
So have they not travelled in the earth that they could see how they met their fate who passed before them ? They were far greater ( in number ) than these people and mightier in power and ( much more advanced ) in respect of the remains and traces ( as well ) that ( they ) have left behind in the earth . But whatever they used to earn brought them no benefit .
So when their Messengers came to them with manifest Signs , they kept rejoicing in the pride of ( the worldly ) knowledge and skill they possessed . And ( in the same state ) that torment engulfed them which they used to mock .
But when they saw Our torment they started saying : We believe in Allah , the One , and reject ( all ) those we used to associate with Him as partners .
Then their acceptance of faith could not profit them at all while they had seen Our torment . That is Allahs pattern which has ever been in practice in respect of His servants and the disbelievers always suffered heavy loss at this juncture .
Ha - Mim . ( Only Allah and the Messenger [ blessings and peace be upon him ] know the real meaning . )
( It is ) sent down from the Most Kind ( Lord ) , Ever - Merciful .
A Book whose Signs are expounded in detail , the Quran , in the Arabic ( language ) for a people who possess knowledge and wisdom .
A Bearer of good news and a Warner . Then most of them turned away . So they do not listen ( to it ) .
And they say : Our hearts are in covers against that to which you call us , and in our ears is heaviness ( of deafness ) , and between us and you is a barrier . So you keep doing ( your ) work and we do our work .
( To remove their barrier and to inspire them to listen , ) say : ( O disbelievers ! ) Well , being a human being outwardly , I am like you . ( Then why are you so averse to me and my call ? ) This Revelation has been sent down to me that your God is One God , so be straight turned towards Him alone and seek forgiveness from Him . And destruction awaits those who associate partners with Him .
Those who do not pay Zakat ( the Alms - due ) , and it is they who deny the Hereafter as well .
Surely those who believe and do righteous works persistently , for them is endless reward .
Say : Do you deny Him ( Allah ) Who created the earth in two days ( i . e . two time - lengths ) , and set up peers with Him ? He is the One Who is the Lord of all the worlds .
And He placed over it heavy mountains ( brought forth ) from within it and treasured in it ( His infinite ) blessings ( minerals , water reservoirs , natural resources , and other substances and forces and energies ) and provided and appointed in it sustenance ( i . e . necessities of life for all the creatures . He ) accomplished ( all that ) in four days ( i . e . four evolutionary periods . All this sustenance is in fact ) equal for all seekers ( and the needy ) .
Then He turned towards the heavenly universe that was ( all ) smoke . So He said to it ( the heavenly spheres ) and the earth : Get in ( compliance with Our system ) either under the influence of mutual attraction and coordination or under aversion and revulsion . Both said : We submit with pleasure .
Then He made seven heavens in two days ( i . e . two phases ) and endued every heavenly universe with its ( built - in ) system . And We adorned the lower heaven with lamps ( i . e . stars and planets ) and made it secure as well ( so that the system of one may not interfere with the other ) . This is the system programmed by the Lord of Absolute Dominance ( and Might ) , the All - Knowing ( Lord ) .
Then if they turn away , say : I warn you of that terrible torment like the destruction of Ad and Thamud .
When the Messengers came to them from their front and from their rear ( or before them and after them and said : ) Worship none but Allah , they said : Had our Lord willed He would have sent down angels . So we deny whatever you have been sent with .
As for the people of Ad , they were unrightfully arrogant ( and rebellious ) in the land and said : Who is greater in might than we are ? And have they not seen that Allah , Who has created them , is far mightier in power than they are ? And they kept denying Our Revelations .
So We sent upon them an appalling violent wind during ill - omened days to make them taste the torment of humiliation in the worldly life and the torment of the Hereafter will be far more degrading . And they will not be helped at all .
And as for the people of Thamud , We showed them the path of guidance , but they preferred blindness to Guidance . So a blast of humiliating devastation seized them for the deeds that they used to earn .
And We delivered those who believed and always put to work piety ( and self - protecton ) .
And the Day when the enemies of Allah will be gathered and driven to Hell , they will be impeded ( shepherded ) and driven ( forcefully ) .
Until when they reach Hell , their ears , their eyes and their skins will bear witness against them concerning the works that they use to do .
Then they will say to their skins : Why did you bear witness against us ? They will say : Allah , Who gives speech to everything , has enabled us to speak . And He is the One Who created you the first time and you will be returned to Him alone .
( While committing the sin ) you did not take any cover even against this ( fear ) that your ears would bear witness against you and ( that ) your eyes and ( that ) your skins ( might even bear witness ) , but you imagined that even Allah did not know many of the deeds that you do .
And it is this notion that you developed about your Lord which ruined you . So you became of the losers .
Now even if they keep patience , their abode is Hell ; and if they seek to earn ( Allahs ) pleasure ( by turning to Him in repentance ) , even then they will not be among those who attain to Allahs pleasure .
And We appointed for them companions ( Satans ) . So they made ( all those deeds ) fascinating to them which were in their front and in their rear . And the same command of torment proved true against them that had gone forth against the communities of jinn and mankind that had passed before them . Surely they were the losers .
And the disbelievers say : Do not listen to this Quran but make noises in ( its recitation sessions ) so that you may overwhelm ( their recitation from the Quran ) .
So We will most certainly make the disbelievers taste the severe torment , and will most certainly requite them for the evil deeds which they used to do .
This Hell is the recompense of the enemies of Allah . There is a home in it for them to live in forever a requital for their denial of Our Revelations .
And those who disbelieved will say : O our Lord , show us those of the jinn and men who led us astray so that we may ( crush ) them under our feet and so that they may become of the most humiliated ones .
Surely those who say : Our Lord is Allah , then stick to it ( firmly ) , angels descend upon them ( and say : ) Do not fear nor grieve and rejoice in the Paradise that you were promised .
We are your friends and helpers in the life of this world and in the Hereafter ( too ) . And there is for you every blessing that you long for . And all those things are ( available ) for you there that you ask for .
( This ) is an entertainment from Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful ( Lord ) .
And who can be more pleasing in speech than one who calls towards Allah and does pious work and says : Surely I am of the obedient servants ( of Allah and the Holy Prophet ) ?
And good and evil cannot be equal . And remove the evil in a better ( way ) with the result that he between whom and you was rivalry before becomes your most warmhearted friend .
And this ( virtue ) is granted only to those who observe patience . And only he acquires this ( capability ) who is blessed with a large share of Bounty .
And , ( O Believing Servant , ) if an evil whisper of Satan stirs your mind seek refuge with Allah ; surely He is All - Hearing , All - Knowing .
And of His Signs are the night and the day and the sun and the moon . So prostrate yourselves neither before the sun nor before the moon . But fall down in prostration only before Allah , Who has created them ( all ) if He is the One Whom you worship .
Then if they show arrogance ( do not care for them ) . So the angels that are in the Presence of your Lord glorify Him night and day , and never are they tired ( and disgruntled ) .
And of His Signs is also that you ( first ) see the earth dry ( and worthless ) , but when We rain water on it , it becomes green and fresh and brings forth vegetation . Surely He Who has brought this ( dead earth ) to life again certainly He is the One Who will give life to the dead ( on the Day of Resurrection ) . Surely He has Absolute Power over everything .
Verily those who turn away from the straight path with regard to ( the meanings of ) Our Verses are not hidden from Us . Then , is he better who is thrown into the Fire of Hell or someone who comes safe and secure ( from the torment ) on the Day of Resurrection ? Do as you wish . Surely He sees all that you do .
Indeed those who disbelieved in the Quran when it had come to them , ( that is their ill fortune ) . And surely it ( the Quran ) is a Mighty Venerable Book .
Falsehood can approach it ( the Quran ) neither from before nor from behind . ( It ) has been sent down by the Most Wise , the Most Praiseworthy ( Lord ) .
( O Beloved ! ) Whatever is said to you are the same Words that have been said to the Messengers before you . Surely your Lord is Most Forgiving and the Master of agonizing chastisement ( as well ) .
And if We had revealed this ( Book ) as a Quran in a non - Arabic language , they would certainly have said : Why have its verses not been expounded expressly ? Is the Book non - Arabic and the Prophet an Arab ? ( So , O Esteemed Beloved , We have revealed the Quran also in your language . ) Say : That ( Quran ) is Guidance as well as Healing for the believers but those who do not believe , their ears are heavy with deafness and that is blindness ( as well ) in their case , ( as if ) they are like men called from afar .
And verily We gave the Book to Musa ( Moses ) but disagreement was perpetrated in that ( too ) . And had not a Command already been given by your Lord , the matter would have been judged between them . And surely they are ( suffering from ) a deceitful doubt about this ( the Quran as well ) .
Whoever does pious work does it for ( the benefit ) of his own self , and whoever commits sin its ( resultant evil suffering ) will fall back on him alone . And your Lord is not at all unjust to His servants .
The knowledge of the Hour of Resurrection is referred to Him ( Allah ) alone . And no fruits come out of their sheath nor does a female conceive or give birth to a child but ( all this ) is in His knowledge . And the Day when He will call out to them : Where are My partners ? they ( the polytheists ) will say : We submit that none of us is a witness ( to anyone being Your partner ) .
All those ( idols ) that they used to worship will disappear from them . And they will make out that they are not left with any way to escape .
Man does not tire of praying for good and if an evil touches him he loses all hope becomes a pessimist .
And if We give Him a taste of Mercy from Us after that misery which touched him , he surely starts saying : This is my privilege . And I do not think that the Last Hour will ever take place . And if at all I am returned to my Lord even then there will surely be good fortune for me in His Presence . So We will certainly inform the disbelievers of the deeds which they did and We shall indeed make them taste the most severe torment .
And when We bestow a favour upon man he turns his face away and , keeping withdrawn , strides far from Us . And when distress touches him he entreats lengthy prayers .
Say : Well , give your view , if this ( Quran ) is really ( sent down ) from Allah and you keep denying it , then who is more astray than he who is ( engaged ) in extreme opposition ?
We will soon show them Our Signs all around the world and in their own selves , until it dawns upon them that indeed this is the Truth . Is your Lord not Sufficient ( to confirm your Trueness ) , for He alone is ( also ) witness to everything ?
Beware that they are in doubt about the Meeting with their Lord . Beware ! He is the One Who encompasses everything ( with His Knowledge and Power ) .
Ha - Mim .
Ain , Sin , Qaf . ( Only Allah and the Messenger [ blessings and peace be upon him ] know the real meaning . )
In like manner has Allah Almighty , All - Wise been sending His Revelations to you and to those ( Messengers ) who have passed before you .
To Him belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth and He is Most High , Most Great .
The heavenly spheres are nearly rent asunder from above them . And the angels keep glorifying their Lord with His praise and begging for forgiveness for those on the earth . Remember ! Allah alone is Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
And those who have taken idols instead of Allah as their protectors and guardians , Allah is Ever - Watchful over their ( affairs ) . And you are not responsible for them ( the disbelievers ) .
And likewise We have revealed to you the Holy Quran in the Arabic language so that you may warn the residents of Makka and its suburbs and that you may warn them of the Day of Assembly about which there is no doubt . ( On that Day ) one party will be in Paradise and the other in Hell .
And had Allah so willed , He would have made all of them a single community . But He admits to His Mercy whom He likes . And for the wrongdoers there will be no protector or guardian .
Have they taken idols as their guardians instead of Allah ? So Allah alone is the Guardian . ( And only His friends are Awliya . ) And He alone gives life to the dead , and He alone is Most Powerful over everything .
And the decision of the matter in which you differ rests only with Allah . That is Allah , my Lord . In Him I put my trust , and to Him alone I turn .
He has brought into existence the heavens and the earth from nothingness . He is the One Who made pairs for you from your own kind and made pairs of cattle as well and with this ( pair strategy ) He multiplies and spreads you . There is nothing like Him and He alone is All - Hearing , All - Seeing .
To Him belong the keys of the heavens and the earth ( i . e . He opens His treasures to whom He wills ) . He grants sustenance abundantly to whom He likes and sparingly ( to whom He wills ) . Surely He knows everything best .
He has prescribed for you the same path of Din ( Religion ) which He enjoined on Nuh ( Noah ) and which We have revealed to you , and which We enjoined on Ibrahim ( Abraham ) and Musa ( Moses ) and Isa ( Jesus . And all it denotes is ) that hold fast to the same Din ( Religion ) and do not make divisions in it . That ( Oneness of Allah ) to which you call them is quite hard for those who set up partners with Allah . Allah ( Himself ) chooses whom He pleases ( for exclusive nearness ) in His Presence , and shows the path to ( come ) towards Himself to everyone who turns ( towards Allah ) heartily .
And they did not break up into factions but only after knowledge had reached them merely on account of their mutual obstinacy ( and stubbornness ) . And had the Command of your Lord not gone forth concerning ( respite ) for an appointed time , the judgment would have been given between them . And verily those who were made inheritors of the Book after them are ( caught ) themselves in deceitful doubt about it .
So keep calling them to this ( Din [ Religion ] ) , and hold fast ( to it ) as the Command has been given to you . And do not give any heed to their desires and say ( this ) : I believe in every Book that Allah has revealed and I have been commanded to do justice between you . Allah is our Lord as well as your Lord . For us are our deeds and for you are your deeds . There is no debate and dispute between us and you . Allah will gather us all together and to Him is the return ( of all ) .
And those who dispute about ( the Din [ Religion ] of ) Allah after it has been accepted , their discussion and contention is false in the sight of their Lord . And upon them is the wrath ( of Allah ) and for them is severe torment .
Allah is He Who has revealed the Book with the Truth and ( also sent down ) the balance ( of equality and justice ) . And who has put you on alert perhaps the Last Hour is near ?
They who do not put ( any ) belief in it seek to hasten this ( Hour ) , and those who believe fear it and know that its coming is the truth . Beware ! Those who argue about the Hour are in extreme error .
Allah is Most Bountiful and Benevolent towards His servants . He bestows His sustenance and Bounty upon whom He wills . And He is Most Strong , Almighty .
He who seeks the harvest in the Hereafter , We grant him further increase in his harvest . And he who desires the harvest of this world We give him some of it , but in the Hereafter there does not remain any share for him .
Have they any ( such ) partners who have established for them a path of Din ( Religion ) about which Allah has not given any Command ? And had the Command of Judgment not ( gone forth ) already , the matter between them would have been settled . And surely there is a painful torment for the wrongdoers .
You will see the wrongdoers fearing those ( deeds ) that they have earned . And that ( torment ) is bound to befall them . And they who believe and persist in pious deeds will be in the gardens of Paradise . There will be for them with their Lord ( all those blessings ) which they will long for . That is indeed a great Bounty .
That is the ( award ) of which Allah gives the good news to those servants who believe and do pious works persistently . Say : I do not ask for any recompense for this ( preaching the faith in Messengership ) but ( seek ) love for ( my ) kindreds and ( my and Allahs ) nearness . And whoever earns good We shall increase for him the reward in the Hereafter . Surely Allah is Most Forgiving , Most Appreciative .
Do they say that this ( Messenger [ blessings and peace be upon him ] ) has invented a lie against Allah ? So if Allah wills , He may set a seal ( of patience and steadfastness ) on your holy heart ( so that their absurd talk may not hurt you ) . And Allah eliminates falsehood and maintains the Truth proved ( i . e . established ) by His Words . Surely , He knows best the secrets of the breasts .
And He is the One Who accepts His servants repentance , and forgives sins , and knows what you do .
And He grants the prayers of those who believe and keep doing pious works , and gives them of His Bounty more ( than they pray for ) . But for those who do not believe is severe punishment .
And if Allah were to expand sustenance for all His servants abundantly , they would surely transgress and revolt in the earth . But He sends down as He pleases according to the measure ( of needs ) . Surely He is Best Aware of His servants ( needs ) , All - Seeing .
And He is the One Who sends down rain after they lose hope and spreads His Mercy . And He , the Guardian , is Most Praiseworthy .
And among His Signs is the creation of the heavens and the earth and ( the creation ) of the moving ( i . e . living ) creatures which He has scattered in them . And He is also Most Powerful to assemble them ( all ) when He wills .
And whatever misfortune befalls you , ( comes upon you ) as a result of that ( evil work ) which your own hands have done while He forgives most of your ( misdoings ) .
And you cannot thwart Allah ( anywhere ) on earth ( with your schemes ) . And , except Allah , none ( of your idols ) will be your guardian and helper .
And among His Signs are the ships on the sea high like mountains .
If He wills He would cause the wind to be absolutely still and the vessels would stand halted on the surface of the sea . Surely there are Signs in it for everyone who observes patience and remains grateful .
Or He would drown those ( vessels or ships ) due to their ( evil ) deeds which they have earned but He forgives many ( mistakes ) .
And those who argue about Our Revelations should know that there is for them no way to escape .
And whatever ( wealth and comforts ) have been given to you is a small benefit for ( a few days ) worldly life , and what is with Allah is better and everlasting . And ( that ) is for those who believe and put trust in their Lord .
And those who refrain from major sins and the indecencies ; and when they feel furious , they forgive .
And those who submit to the Command of their Lord , and establish Prayer , and their decisions are made through consultations , and spend in Our Way out of the provision which We have given them .
And those who take revenge when they are wronged ( by a tyrant and wrongdoer ) .
And the requital of an evil is the like of that evil . Then he who forgives and ( by forgiving ) reforms , his reward is with Allah . Verily , He does not make friends with the wrongdoers .
And indeed he who avenges the wrong that has been done to him , they will no way be ( blamed and taken to task ) .
But the way ( to persecute ) is only against those who wrong the people and spread corruption and violence unjustly in the land . It is they for whom there is a painful torment .
And surely he who keeps patience and forgives , it is certainly of the deeds which demand great courage and resolve .
And the one whom Allah holds astray for him there is no protector after that . And you will see the wrongdoers , when they see the torment ( of the Last Day ) , will say : Is there any way to go back ( to the world ) ?
And you will see them brought to Hell with their heads bent with disgrace and fear , looking at it covertly ( with stealthy glance ) and the believers will say : Surely the losers are those who put their own souls and their families into loss on the Last Day . Remember ! Indeed the wrongdoers will remain in ( the agony of ) a lasting torment .
And there will be no supporters for the ( disbelievers ) to help them against Allah . And he whom Allah holds astray , there is no way left for him ( towards guidance ) .
Accept and submit to the Command of your Lord before the Day comes for which there is no averting from Allah . There will be no shelter for you on that Day . Nor will there be any possibility for you to deny .
( Even ) then if they turn away , We have not sent you with any responsibility for ( saving ) them ( from destruction ) . You are responsible only to convey ( the Message of Truth ) . And verily when We make man taste ( the savour ) of Mercy from Our Presence , he feels pleased . But when some misfortune reaches them owing to the ( evil ) deeds sent ahead by their own hands then no doubt man ( proves ) to be highly ungrateful .
For Allah alone is the Sovereignty of the heavens and the earth . He creates what He likes . He blesses with girls whom He wills and blesses with boys whom He wills .
Or He gives them daughters and sons ( both ) and makes infertile whom He wills . Surely he is All - Knowing , All - Powerful .
And every man has not ( this ) faculty that Allah should speak to him ( directly ) except that by Revelation ( He bestows upon some the holy status of Prophethood ) or ( should talk ) from behind a veil ( as He spoke to Musa [ Moses ] on Mount Tur of Sinai ) or by sending some angel as a messenger to reveal with His permission what Allah may will . ( In any case , the medium and mediation of communication of Allahs Word for mankind is none but the Prophet and the Messenger . ) Surely He is Most High , Most Wise .
So thus We revealed to you Our Spirit ( of hearts and souls ) by Our Command ( that is the Quran ) . And ( before Revelation ) you did not know what the Book was , nor did you know ( through your own endeavour and insight the details of the injunctions of ) faith ( which were sent down and determined later ) . But We made it a Light . By means of this Light We give guidance to those of Our servants whom We intend . And assuredly you alone provide guidance towards the straight path .
Ha - Mim ( Only Allah and the Messenger [ blessings and peace be upon him ] know the real meaning . )
By the illumined Book .
Verily , We have made it the Quran in the Arabic ( language ) so that you may understand .
Verily , it is inscribed with Us in ( al - Lawh al - Mahfuz [ the Preserved Table ] ) , the origin of all the Books . It is certainly exalted ( over all the Books ) , full of wisdom .
And should We withhold this Reminder from you because you are a people who exceed limits ?
And how many a Messenger We sent among the preceding communities !
And no Prophet came to them but they used to make fun of him .
And We destroyed the people who were more powerful than these ( disbelievers of Makka ) . And the annals of the bygone people have been cited ( on many preceding occasions ) .
And if you ask them : Who has created the heavens and the earth ? they will certainly say : The Almighty , All - Knowing ( Lord ) has created them .
( He is ) the One Who has made the earth a cradle for you and has made for you pathways in it so that you may reach the destination .
And He Who sent water from the sky according to a measure ( of necessity ) . Then with that We gave life to the dead city . You will also be brought forth ( after death from the earth ) in the same way .
And He Who has brought into existence creatures of all kinds and made for you ships and vessels and the cattle you ride ( on sea as well as on land ) .
So that you may sit on their backs ( seats ) firmly , then remember the favour of your Lord . When you sit firmly on it ( the seat of your means of transport ) , say : Glory be to Him Who has made it subservient to us whereas we could not bring it under control .
And indeed We are bound to return to our Lord .
And those ( polytheists ) have made some of His servants His components ( of Divinity by declaring them His children ) . Verily man is blatantly ungrateful .
( O disbelievers ! Reply according to your caliber of thinking : ) Has He chosen ( for Himself ) daughters out of His Creation and has specified you to sons ?
Whereas when the news is given to anyone of them ( of the birth of a daughter at his home ) whom they have held as an image of the Most Kind Lord , his face turns dark and he is filled with anger and grief .
And ( will Allah make her His offspring for partnership and assistance in His affairs ) who will be brought up in trinkets and beautification and who shall never be bold ( in giving her opinion expressly ) in a contention ( owing to her mild , modest and feminine temperament ) ?
And they have declared the angels who are the servants of the Most Kind ( Lord ) to be women . Were they present at the time of their creation ? ( They were not , so ) now their witness will be recorded and they will be interrogated ( on the Last Day ) .
And they say : If the Most Kind had intended , we would not have worshipped these ( idols ) . They do not know anything about this ( as well ) . They only tell lies out of fancy .
Have We given them before this any Book which they stick to as an authority ?
( No , ) but they say : Indeed we found our fathers following a course ( and a religion ) , and surely we are rightly guided ( following ) in their footsteps .
And the same way We never sent any Warner to a town before you but their chiefs and the affluent people among them said : Surely we found our fathers following a course and a religion and certainly we are following in their footsteps .
( The Messenger ) said : Even though I bring you a way ( and Din [ Religion ] ) better than that on which you found your fathers ? They said : We deny whatever you have been sent with .
So We took revenge on them . So see what was the end of those who denied !
And when Ibrahim ( Abraham ) said to his father ( real uncle but called him father as he brought him up ) and his people : Surely I despise all these things that you worship .
Except for Him Who has created me . So He alone will show me the path very soon .
And Ibrahim ( Abraham ) made that ( formula of the Oneness of Allah ) the lasting Word among his descendants and race so that they may remain bent ( towards Allah ) .
In truth , I bestowed upon these people and their ancestors ( worldly ) provision ( for the sake of and due to the mediation of Ibrahim [ Abraham ] ) until there came to them the Truth ( the Quran ) and the Messenger [ blessings and peace be upon him ] with clear and illumining exposition .
And when the Truth reached them they said : This is magic and we deny it .
And they said : Why has this Quran not been sent down upon some high - ranking personage ( i . e . some chief , landlord , or capitalist ) of the two towns ( Makka and Taif ) ?
Is it they who distribute the Mercy ( of the Prophethood ) of your Lord ? We distribute among them ( the resources of ) economy in the life of this world , and We alone raise some of them in grades ( of wealth and resources ) over the others .
( Do We do this so that ) some of them ( who are rich ) should make fun of the others ( who are poor ? This is mockery of poverty if , due to this , you do not consider someone as deserving the Mercy of the Prophethood . )
And the Mercy of your Lord is better than that ( wealth ) which they amass ( and become arrogant ) .
And had it not been that mankind ( converging on disbelief ) would have become one community , We would have made , for those who disbelieve in the Most Kind Lord , silver roofs for their houses and silver staircases by which they ascend .
And likewise ( silver ) doors of their houses and the couches ( too ) on which they recline .
And ( would also have done ) ornamentation of gold and jewels ( over this silver work ) . But all that is the temporary and worthless possession of the life of this world . And ( the beauty and ornamentation of ) the Hereafter is with your Lord ( which is ) only for the pious .
And whoever closes his eyes to the remembrance of the Most Kind ( Lord ) , We appoint a Satan to dominate him and stick to him all the time .
And these ( satans ) hinder them from the path ( of guidance ) but they maintain this wrong perception that they are on the path of guidance .
Until when he will come to Us , he will say ( to his companion Satan ) : Alas ! Would that there had been between me and you the distance of east and west . So ( you were ) the most evil companion indeed !
And this Day it is not profitable for you ( to have this aspiration ) whereas you kept doing wrong ( all your life . Today ) all of you will share the torment .
Then will you make the deaf hear or show the path of guidance to the blind and those who are in open error ?
So if We take you away ( from the world ) , even then We shall take revenge on them .
Or We show you that ( torment ) which We have promised them . Certainly We have absolute control over them .
So hold fast to this ( Quran ) which has been revealed to you . Surely you are ( firm ) on the straight path .
And verily this ( Quran ) is the most great honour for you and for your Umma ( Community ) . And , ( O people , ) you will soon be asked ( how strong and firm a relation you established with the Quran . )
And ask the Messengers We sent before you whether We made any gods to be worshipped instead of the Most Kind ( Lord ) .
And certainly We sent Musa ( Moses ) with Our Signs to Pharaoh and his chiefs . He said : Indeed I am the Messenger of the Lord of all the worlds .
So when he came to them with Our Signs , there they began laughing at the ( Signs ) .
And never did We show them any sign but ( that ) it used to be far greater than the resembling sign preceding it . And ( eventually ) We seized them ( many a time ) with the torment so that they might desist ( from the evil course ) .
And they said : O Magician , pray to your Lord for us according to the promise He has made to you . ( Then ) surely we shall be guided .
But when ( granting the prayer of Musa [ Moses ] ) We removed from them that torment , they at once violated the promise .
And Pharaoh ( arrogantly ) proclaimed among his people , saying : O my people , is not the kingdom of Egypt under my control , and ( are ) these streams ( not mine ) which are flowing beneath my ( palaces ) ? So do you not see ?
( Is it not the fact that ) I am better than this worthless low man who cannot even talk clearly ?
Then ( if he is a truthful Messenger ) why are the bracelets of gold not sent upon him or why do the angels not come with him in ranks ( in succession ) ?
So he made a fool of his people ( by these utterances ) and they followed him . Indeed they alone were a disobedient people .
But when they spurred Our wrath ( by denigrating the dignity of Musa [ Moses ] ) , We took revenge on them and drowned them all .
So We made them a tale and a lesson of warning for the communities to succeed .
And when the example of ( Isa [ Jesus ] ) son of Maryam ( Mary ) is given , your people ( mockingly ) laugh .
And say : Are our gods better or he ( Isa [ Jesus ] ) ? They say this only to have a dispute with you . No doubt , they are highly quarrelsome .
He ( Isa [ Jesus ] ) was only an ( exalted ) servant whom We blessed with favour . And We made him an example ( of Our Might ) for the Children of Israel .
And had We so willed , We would have made angels who would have been your successors to replace you in the earth .
And surely ( when heIsa [ Jesus ] comes down from heaven ) , he will be a sign of ( the nearness of ) the Last Hour . So do not doubt it at all . And keep following Me . This is the straight path .
And let not Satan hinder you ( from this way ) at all . No doubt he is your open enemy .
And when Isa [ Jesus ] came with evident Signs , he said : Surely I have come to you with wisdom and understanding , and ( with the purpose ) that I may make clear to you some of the matters on which you disagree . So fear Allah and obey me .
Surely Allah is the One Who is your Lord and my Lord ( as well ) . So worship Him alone . That is the only straight path .
Then various sects cropped up among them . So those who did wrong , woe to them on account of the torment of a grievous Day .
What are they waiting for ( save ) the Hour that should seize them all of a sudden while they have no awareness of it ?
On that Day , all friends and acquaintances will become enemies to one another except the pious . ( Only their friendship and nearness [ wilaya ] will prove fruitful . )
( It will be said to them : ) O My ( intimate ) servants , there is no fear for you this Day , nor shall you grieve .
( It is ) they who believed in Our Revelations and were always obedient ( to Us ) .
Enter Paradise , you and your intimate companions ( all ) ; you will be honoured ( with blessings , comforts and pleasures of Paradise ) .
The plates and drinking cups made of gold will be passed around among them , and all those things which the hearts will long for , and ( which ) will cool the eyes will be available there . And you will live there forever .
And , ( O Godfearing folk , ) this is the Paradise of which you have been made the owners , a recompense of those ( works ) which you used to do .
There are abundant fruits in it for you to eat .
Indeed the sinners will live forever in the torment of Hell .
Which will never be decreased for them and they will be lying there in endless despair .
And We have not wronged them but they were themselves the wrongdoers .
And they will cry out ( to the Guard of Hell ) : O Master , ( better it is if ) your Lord causes us to die . He will say : ( Now ) you will live ( in the same plight ) forever .
Surely We brought you the Truth but most of you disliked the Truth .
Have they ( the disbelievers of Makka ) finalized ( any scheme against the Messenger [ blessings and peace be upon him ] ) ? So We ( too ) are going to take the ultimate decision .
Do they think that We do not hear their secret talk and whisperings ? Why not ? ( We do listen . ) And the angels sent by Us also remain with them busy writing .
Say : If ( supposing the impossible ) the Most Kind Lord had a son ( or children ) , I would have been the first one to worship ( the same ) .
The Lord of the heavens and the earth , the Lord of the Throne , Glory be to Him , Transcendent of all what they ascribe ( to Him ) .
So leave them . Let them remain indulged in vain talk and absurd sport until they meet the Day which they are being promised .
And He is the One Who is God in the heaven and God in the earth ( as well ) and He is Most Wise , All - Knowing .
And Most Blessed is He to Whom belongs the Kingdom of the heavens and the earth and ( also of all ) that is between them . And He has the knowledge of the Last Hour ( as well ) , and you will be returned to Him alone .
And those they ( i . e . the disbelievers ) worship instead of Allah have no power to intercede . But ( on the contrary they do have the power of intercession ) who bear witness to the Truth , and they also know it ( with certitude ) .
And if you ask them : Who has created them ? they will certainly say : Allah . Then where are they wandering disorientated ?
And by his ( Esteemed Messengers ) saying ( like this ) : O Lord , surely they are a people who ( somehow ) do not come to believe .
So , ( O My Beloved , ) turn your face away from them and say ( like this : Alright , our greeting is : ) Peace ! Then they will soon come to know ( their end ) .
Ha , Mim . ( Only Allah and the Messenger [ blessings and peace be upon him ] know the real meaning . )
By this Light - Giving Book .
Surely We have sent it down in a blessed night . Surely We are the Warner .
In this ( night ) judgment is given on all matters of wisdom ( separately ) .
By Our Command ; surely it is We Who send .
( It ) is Mercy from your Lord . Verily He is All - Hearing , All - Knowing .
The Lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them , provided you have faith with certitude .
There is no God but He . He is the One Who gives life and causes death . He is your Lord and the Lord of your fathers ( as well ) .
Yet they are in doubt , busy playing .
So wait for the Day when the sky will cause a clear smoke to appear .
Which will envelop people ( i . e . will encompass everything ) . That will be a painful torment .
( They will then say : ) O our Lord ! Remove this torment from us . Surely we believe .
How can their accepting the admonition now be ( of any use ) whereas there came to them a Messenger with clear exposition ?
But they turned their faces from him and ( denigrating ) they said : ( He ) is an educated madman .
Indeed We remove the torment a little ( but ) you will certainly start reiterating ( the same disbelief ) .
The Day when We will seize with the Greatest Seizure , ( that Day ) We shall certainly exact revenge .
And in fact We put to trial the people of Pharaoh ( also ) before them and the exalted Messenger ( Musa [ Moses ] ) came to them .
( He said : ) Hand over to me the servants of Allah ( i . e . the Children of Israel ) . Verily I am a trusted Messenger for your guidance and leadership .
And do not rebel against Allah . I have come to you with the enlightening proof .
And I have indeed sought the protection of my Lord and your Lord lest you should stone me .
And if you do not believe in me then keep away from me .
Then he prayed to his Lord : Surely they are a sinful people .
( Allah said : ) Then set out with My servants by night . You shall certainly be chased .
And ( after you pass through ) leave the river still and split open . Surely they are an army who will be drowned .
How many a garden and spring they left behind !
And green crops and magnificent buildings !
And blessings ( and comforts ) in which they used to luxuriate !
So it happened ! We made another people the inheritors of all that .
Then neither the heaven nor the earth wept over them , nor were they given respite .
And verily We delivered the Children of Israel from a humiliating suffering .
From Pharaoh . Indeed he was of the most rebellious transgressors .
And surely We chose them ( the Children of Israel ) above ( the contemporary civilizations of ) the world on the basis of knowledge .
And We bestowed upon them Signs containing an obvious favour ( and a clear trial ) .
Surely they say .
There is nothing after our first death and we will not be raised up ( again ) .
So bring back our ancestors ( alive ) if you are truthful .
Well , are they better or the people of Tubba ( the people of Asad Abu Kurib al - Hamiri , the King of Yemen ) and those who were before them ? We destroyed ( all of ) them . Surely they were people given to evildoing .
And We have not created the heavens and the earth and all that is between them merely in sport .
We have created them both with ( the purpose and reason ) of Truth . But most of them do not know .
Surely the Day of Judgment is the appointed time for all of them .
The Day when a friend shall not avail a friend at all , nor will they be helped .
Except those to whom Allah has shown Mercy . ( They will intercede for one another . ) Surely He is Almighty , Ever - Merciful .
Indeed the tree bearing thorny fruit .
Will be the food of the major sinners .
It will boil in the bellies like molten copper .
Like the seething of simmering water .
( It will be commanded : ) Seize him and drag him forcefully to the midst of Hell .
Then torment him by pouring boiling water over his head .
Taste it ! Yes , you it is the respectable and venerable ( in your notion and claim ) .
Certainly this is the very Hell you used to doubt .
Assuredly the Godfearing will be in a place of calm and peace .
Amid gardens and springs .
Dressed in fine silk and heavy brocade , facing one another .
So will it happen ! And We will marry them to fair maidens having lovely wide eyes .
( Sitting ) there , they will call calmly for every kind of fruit .
There ( in Paradise ) they will not taste death except the first death ( which would have passed ) . And Allah will save them from the torment of Hell .
It is a Bounty of your Lord ( i . e . your Lord will bestow through your mediation alone ) . That is but a great success .
So We have made this ( Quran ) easy in your own tongue so that they may take advice .
So ( do ) wait . Certainly they ( too ) are waiting . ( You will see the revenge and their evil end and they will see your glory and My favours to the believers through your mediation . )
Ha . Mim . ( Only Allah and the Messenger [ blessings and peace be upon him ] know the real meaning . )
The revelation of ( this ) Book is from Allah , Almighty , Most Wise .
Indeed there are signs for the believers in the heavens and the earth .
And in your ( own ) creation , and in the animals which He scatters , there are signs for those who believe with certitude .
And in the alternation of night and day and in that provision ( of rain ) which Allah sends down from the sky , and by that gives life to the earth after its death , and ( in the same way ) in changing the wind direction , there are Signs for those who apply reason .
These are the Revelations of Allah which We recite to you with absolute Truth . Then what will they believe in after Allah and His Revelations ?
Woe to every liar given to fabricating false allegations ( and ) every dreadful evildoer .
The one who listens to the Revelations of Allah that are recited to him , then insists ( on his disbelief ) arrogantly as if he did not hear them , give him the news of a grievous torment .
And when he learns about anything of Our Verses ( of the Quran ) , he makes it a joke . It is they for whom there is humiliating torment .
Beyond ( their current term of life ) , there is Hell . And ( the worldly riches ) which they have earned will be of no use to them . Nor will those idols be ( of any benefit ) that they have made guardians instead of Allah . And there is a very severe torment for them .
This ( Quran ) is guidance . And those who disbelieved in the Revelations of Allah , for them is in store extremely grievous torment .
Allah is the One Who has placed the sea under your control so that ships and vessels may sail in it by His Command , so that you may look for His bounty ( i . e . sustenance through sea routes as well ) , and that you may become grateful ( to Him ) .
And He has made subservient to you , out of His will , whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth , all of it ( under a system ) . Surely there are Signs in it for those who ponder .
Say to the believers to disregard those who neither hope for nor fear ( the coming of ) the Days of Allah , so that He may give them full reward of those ( deeds ) which they used to earn .
Whoever does a righteous work does it for ( the benefit of ) his own soul and whoever commits some evil act , then he alone is to face ( suffering caused by it ) . Then all of you will be returned to your Lord .
And surely We gave to the Children of Israel the Book , the regime and Prophethood and provided them with sustenance of pure things . And We exalted them above ( their contemporary ) worlds ( i . e . the nations and civilizations of that age ) .
And We gave them clear proofs of religion ( and Prophethood ) . But they disagreed ( about it ) after the knowledge ( of raising the Prophet Muhammad ) had come to them , merely because of their mutual jealousy , spite and antagonism . Surely your Lord will judge between them on the Day of Judgment concerning the matter in which they used to disagree .
Then We set you on the open path of Sharia ( Islamic Law ) . So follow it persistently . And do not yield to the desires of those who are simply unaware ( of the glory , dignity and trueness of your Din [ Religion ] ) .
Surely these people will not be of any help to you at all ( despite promises ) from Allah ( for crucial time of hardships coming in the way of Islam ) . And in truth the wrongdoers ( in the world ) are friends and helpers only to one another and Allah is the Friend and Helper of the Godfearing .
This ( Quran ) contains proofs , which provide vision and lessons of warning to the people , and is Guidance and Mercy for those who believe with certitude .
Do those who have earned evil deeds think that We will make them resemble those who believe and do good deeds ( so as ) to make their life and death alike ? The claim , which they ( the disbelievers ) make , is the worst evil .
And Allah created the heavens and the earth with ( a strategy based on ) Truth in order that every soul is rewarded for the deeds that it earns and they will not be wronged .
Have you seen him who has made his desire his god and Allah has held him astray despite his knowledge and has sealed his ears and his heart and has blindfolded his eyes ? Then who can guide him after Allah ? So do you not accept advice ?
And they say : There is nothing ( else ) except our worldly life . We die and live here ( only ) . And nothing kills us except ( circumstances and occurrences of ) time ( i . e . they deny Allah and the Hereafter absolutely ) . And they simply do not have any knowledge of this ( reality ) . They follow only their speculation and assumption .
And when Our clear Verses are recited to them , they do not have any plea except to say : Bring back our fathers ( raised alive ) if you are truthful .
Say : Allah is the One Who gives you life and He is the One Who causes you to die . Then He will gather all of you towards the Day of Resurrection about which there is no doubt . But most people do not know .
And the Kingdom of the heavens and the earth belongs to Allah alone . And the Day when the Last Hour comes , then ( all ) the disbelievers will run into serious loss .
And you will see every party ( of the disbelievers and beliers ) sitting , fallen on their knees . Every community will be called to its book ( of deeds ) : You will be rewarded Today for the deeds that you used to do .
This is Our record that will speak about you with absolute truth . Verily We used to ( preserve ) by getting transcribed what you used to do .
So those who believe and do good deeds , their Lord will admit them to His Mercy . That is nothing but an evident success .
And those who disbelieved ( it will be said to them : ) Were My Verses not recited to you ? But you showed arrogance and you were the evildoers .
And when it was said : The promise of Allah is true and there is no doubt about ( the coming of ) the Last Hour , you used to say : We do not know what the Last Hour is , nor do we have any faith in it .
And all their evil works will be exposed which they used to do , and that ( torment ) will beset them which they used to make fun of .
And it will be said ( to them ) : Today We forget you as you forgot your Meeting on this Day . And Hell is your abode and there will be no helper for you .
That ( is ) so because you made fun of Allahs Revelations , and the worldly life deceived you . So Today neither will they be taken out of that ( Hell ) , nor will be accepted from them any attempt to seek ( Allahs ) pleasure by means of repentance .
So all praise belongs to Allah alone Who is the Lord of the heavens and the Master of the earth ( and also ) the Sustainer of all the worlds .
And all Greatness ( i . e . Eminence ) in the heavens and the earth belongs to Him alone and He is the One Who is Almighty , Most Wise .
Ha - Mim . ( Only Allah and the Messenger [ blessings and peace be upon him ] know the real meaning . )
The revelation of this Book is from Allah , Almighty , Most Wise .
And We have not created the heavens and the earth and ( the Creation ) that is between them but with wisdom and ( fixing of ) the appointed term . And those who have disbelieved turn away from what they have been warned of .
Say : Tell me of the ( idols ) you worship instead of Allah ; show me what they have created in the earth , or ( bring it forth if ) they have a partnership in ( the creation of ) the heavens . Bring me ( as a proof ) any Book ( revealed ) before this ( Quran ) or some remnant of knowledge ( of the bygone people in transit down the line ) , if you are truthful .
And who can be more in error than someone who worships such ( idols ) apart from Allah as cannot answer ( his question ) till the Day of Resurrection ? And those ( idols ) have no consciousness of their ( very ) prayer and worship .
And when mankind shall be gathered ( on the Day of Resurrection ) those ( false gods ) will be their enemies and will deny their worship ( for their own absolution ) .
And when Our clear Verses are recited to them ( then ) the disbelievers say about the Truth ( the Quran ) while it has come to them : This is obvious magic .
Do they say that ( the Messenger ) has fabricated it ( the Quran ) ? Say : If I have concocted it then you have no authority to save me from ( the torment of ) Allah . And He knows best the ( words ) you utter about this ( Quran ) as mockery . He ( Allah ) is Sufficient as witness between me and you . And He is Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
Say : I am not the first Messenger ( towards mankind that no precedent of Messengership exists before me ) . Nor do I know of my own accord ( i . e . purely by means of my own mental faculty and self - application ) what will be done to me or what will be done to you . ( My knowledge is nothing except that ) I follow that Revelation alone which is sent to me . ( It is this that provides me knowledge about everything . ) And I am simply a clear Warner ( on the basis of this knowledge obtained through Revelation ) .
Say : Tell me , if this ( Quran ) is from Allah and you deny it and a witness from the Children of Israel ( also ) bears testimony to the mention of ( the revelation of ) such a Book ( in the Revealed Books revealed earlier ) , then he believes ( in it as well ) but ( despite that ) you show arrogance , ( then what will be your fate ? ) Surely Allah does not guide the wrongdoing people .
And the disbelievers said to the believers : Had it ( Din of Muhammad [ blessings and peace be upon him ] ) been ( a ) better ( religion ) , these people would not have advanced towards it taking lead over us . ( We would have accepted it before anyone else . ) And when they ( the disbelievers ) have not taken guidance from it ( themselves ) now they say : This is an old lie ( and a fabrication ) .
And before it was the Book of Musa ( Moses [ the Torah ] ) , a Guide and Mercy . And this Book confirms that . It is in the Arabic language to warn the wrongdoers and give good news to the pious .
Surely those who say : Allah is our Lord , then hold fast ( to it ) have nothing to fear , nor shall they grieve .
They it is , the people of Paradise , who will live in it forever . This is the reward of the deeds they used to do .
And We have commanded man to be benevolent towards his parents . His mother bears him ( in the womb ) with pain and gives birth to him with pain . And bearing him ( in the womb ) and weaning of him ( i . e . the period of pregnancy and feeding ) is ( spread over ) thirty months . Till , when he attains to manhood and then reaches ( the fully mature age of ) forty years , he says : O my Lord , bestow on me the ability to give You thanks for the favour which You have done to me and my parents , and that I may do such deeds as may please You , and endow me and my children with virtue and piousness . Assuredly I turn to You , and certainly I am of those who obey You in submissiveness .
It is they whose good works We accept and overlook their omissions . ( It is ) they ( who ) are the people of Paradise . This is the True Promise which is being made to them .
And he who says to his parents : Fie on you ! Do you promise me that I shall be brought forth ( from the grave and given life once more ) when generations have passed away before me ? Now both ( the parents ) pray to Allah for help ( and say to the son : ) Woe to you , ( O son ! ) Accept faith . Surely Allahs promise is true . But he says ( in reply ) : These ( words ) are nothing but fiction of the bygone people .
It is they against whom the Command of Allahs ( torment ) has proved true among generations that have passed of the jinn as well as mankind . Surely they ( all ) were the losers .
And the ranks ( in Paradise and Hell ) are allocated for all ( separately ) according to the ( good and evil ) deeds which they do , so that ( Allah ) pays them back in full for their actions and they shall not be wronged at all .
And the Day when the disbelievers will be brought before the Fire of Hell ( it will be said to them : ) You received your favourite and tasteful luxuries in the life of the world and exacted from them ( maximum ) benefit . So , Today you will be rewarded punishment of humiliation because you lived on earth with arrogance unjustly and ( also ) because you used to disobey .
And , ( O Beloved , ) remember ( Hud ) , the kinship brother of the people of Ad , when he warned his people ( of the dire consequences of their evil deeds ) in al - Ahqaf , ( the Sand - Dunes [ a valley in Yemen , between Uman ( Oman ) and Mahra ] ) although ( a number of ) Warners ( Messengers ) had passed before and after him , ( saying : ) Worship no one but Allah . I fear for you the punishment of a ( Terrible ) Day .
They said : Have you come to us to turn us away from our gods ? So bring us that ( torment ) you are threatening us with , if you are of those who speak the truth .
He said : The knowledge ( of the Hour of the torment ) is with Allah alone . And I am only transmitting to you the injunctions which I have been sent with . But I can see that you are an ignorant people .
So when they saw that ( torment ) advancing on their valleys like a cloud , they said : This is the cloud that is going to rain upon us . ( No , not so ; ) this ( cloud ) is rather that ( torment ) which you were restlessly seeking to hasten . ( This ) is the storm in which is ( approaching ) a grievous punishment .
( That ) will destroy everything by the command of its Lord . They were ( destroyed ) in such a way that nothing could be seen except their ( ruined ) houses . That is how We punish the evildoers .
( O people of Makka ! ) In fact We had given them power and ability in those fields of activity in which We have not granted you potential . And We blessed them with hearing and sight and ( invaluable qualities of ) head and heart . But neither their ears nor their eyes , nor their heads and hearts were of any use to them since they kept denying the Signs of Allah . And ( at last ) that ( torment ) besieged them which they used to laugh at .
And , ( O people of Makka , ) indeed We destroyed many a town around you , and displayed Our Signs time and again so that they might turn ( back to them from disbelief ) .
Then why did those ( idols ) not come to their aid which they had taken as gods besides Allah for attaining ( His ) nearness ? But in fact they ( false gods ) were lost from them . And this ( setting up false gods ) was their lie . And ( it was ) this fabrication that they used to weave .
And , when ( O Beloved , ) We diverted a group of jinn who listened to the Quran with active attention to attend to you ( and ) when they came there ( i . e . before the Holy Presence of the Messenger ) they said ( to one another ) : Keep silent . And when ( the recitation ) was over they went back grown into warners to their people ( i . e . the callers to the Truth ) .
They said : O our people ( O community of jinn ) , indeed we have heard such a Book that has been revealed after ( the Torah of ) Musa ( Moses . It ) confirms ( the Books ) that came before it and guides to the true ( Din [ Religion ] ) and the straight road .
O our people ! Accept the call of the Caller ( the Holy Prophet Muhammad [ blessings and peace be upon him ] ) to Allah and believe in him . Allah will , then , forgive your sins and save you from a painful punishment .
And he who does not accept the call of the Caller ( the Holy Prophet Muhammad [ blessings and peace be upon him ] ) to Allah , cannot thwart Allah ( by running away ) on earth . Nor will there be any helpers for him except Allah . It is they who are in open error .
Do they not know that Allah Who created the heavens and the earth and was not tired by creating them has ( also ) the power to bring the dead back to life ( again ) ? Yes , of course , He has power over everything .
And the Day when the disbelievers will be brought to the Fire ( it will be said to them : ) Is this ( punishment ) not based on the truth ? They will say : Yes , of course ! By our Lord ( it is true ) . ( Allah ) will say : Then taste the punishment you used to deny .
( O Beloved ! ) So be steadfast as ( other ) Messengers with unwavering determination too were steadfast and do not hasten ( to seek the torment ) for these ( deniers ) . The Day they will see this ( punishment in the Hereafter ) which they are being promised , ( they will think ) as though they did not stay ( in the world ) for more than an hour . ( This is but ) the communication of the Message ( from Allah ) . The people other than the disobedient ones will not be destroyed .
Those who disbelieve and hinder ( others ) from the way of Allah , Allah destroys their actions ( as for their reward in the Hereafter ) .
And those who embrace faith and do pious works persistently and believe in this ( Book ) which has been revealed to Muhammad ( blessings and peace be upon him ) and that is the very Truth from their Lord , Allah erases their evil works from their ( record of deeds ) and refines their states of being .
That is because those who disbelieve follow falsehood and those who believe follow the Truth ( sent down ) from their Lord . That is how Allah illustrates for people their states of being .
So when you are to fight ( for the elimination of militancy and terrorism ) against the ( warring ) disbelievers ( in the battlefield ) , strike their necks ( while fighting because they took innocent human lives and destroyed peace by their terrorist activities ) till , when you have killed a good many of them ( in the battle ) , then tie ( the remaining prisoners ) tightly . Thereafter either set ( them ) free ( without ransom ) as a favour or ( free them ) for ransom ( i . e . cost of freedom ) till the warring ( hostile army ) lays down its weapons ( i . e . announces the truce ) . That is ( the command ) . And if Allah had willed , He would have avenged Himself on them ( without war ) . But ( He did not do so ) in order to try some of you by means of others . And as for those who are slain in the way of Allah , He will not at all make their actions fruitless .
He will soon put them on the straight path ( of Paradise ) and will greatly enhance their states of being ( in the Hereafter ) .
And He will ( ultimately ) admit them to Paradise which He has ( already ) made well known to them .
O Believers ! If you help ( Din [ Religion ] of ) Allah , He will help you and will make your feet firm .
And those who disbelieve , for them is destruction and ( Allah ) has ruined their actions .
That is because they hate that ( Book ) which Allah has sent down so He has made their actions come to nothing .
Have they not travelled and toured in the earth so that they could see the fate of those who passed before them ? Allah cast upon them total destruction . There are many such calamities awaiting the disbelievers .
That is because Allah is the Protector and Helper of those who believe and for sure the disbelievers do not have any protector and helper .
Surely those who believe and do pious works , Allah will admit them to Gardens with streams flowing under them , and those who disbelieve and are enjoying ( worldly ) gains and eat as cattle ( animals ) do , so Hell alone will be their abode .
And , ( O Beloved , ) how many a town have We destroyed whose citizens wielded greater power ( i . e . resources and authority ) than ( the residents of ) your city ( Makka ) whose ( powerful chiefs ) have driven you out ( by emigration ) ! We have destroyed them as well and no one came to their help ( who could save them ) .
Is someone who is ( firm ) on the clear proof from his Lord like those whose evil actions are shown to them as fair and who follow the desires of their ( ill - commanding ) selves ?
A feature of the Paradise which is promised to the Godfearing is that there are in it streams of ( such ) water as will never putrefy ( in smell or colour ) , and ( in it ) will be streams of milk whose taste and flavour will never change and streams of ( such a pure ) wine that is an absolute delight for all who drink it and streams of purified honey ; and ( in it ) will be fruits of every kind ( for them ) and forgiveness ( of every sort ) from their Lord . Can this ( pious man ) be like those who are permanent residents of Hell and who will be given scalding water to drink which will cut their gut into pieces ?
And among them are those who give ears to you ( without their heads and hearts in it ) till , when they leave your presence and go ( out ) , they ask those who have been given ( profitable ) knowledge : What is it that he ( the Holy Messenger [ blessings and peace be upon him ] ) just said ? It is they whose hearts Allah has sealed up and they are following their lusts .
And as for those who have taken Guidance , Allah increases their guidance and honours them with their station of Godwariness .
So are they ( the deniers ) now just waiting for the Last Hour to come upon them all of a sudden ? Its Signs have no doubt drawn ( near ) . But what ( good ) will their admonition do to them when the Last Hour ( itself ) approaches ?
Know then that there is no God except Allah and ( to offer worship and to educate the Umma [ Community ] ) always ask forgiveness ( from Allah ) lest an action unworthy of your incomparability ( i . e . lesser than and inferior to your unsurpassed rank ) should get into occurrence mode . And also seek forgiveness ( i . e . intercede ) for the believing men and women , ( for that is all they may have in balance for forgiveness ) . And , ( O people , ) Allah knows ( all about ) the places where you move about ( in the world ) and your mansions of repose ( in the Hereafter ) .
And the believers say why a Sura ( Chapter ) is not revealed ( about the command of fighting ) . But when a clear Sura is revealed and fighting for the cause of Allah is ( plainly ) mentioned in it , you see those who have the disease ( of hypocrisy ) in their hearts looking at you like someone who is fainting to death . So , for them is disaster .
( Best for them would be ) obedience and good words . So when the command of fighting ( for self - protection and self - defence ) was definite ( and firm ) , then if they had been true to Allah ( in obedience and dedication ) , that would have been better for them .
So , ( O hypocrites , ) what is expected of you is that if you ( escape fighting by dodging and ) attain to power , you will spread only mischief in the land and break your ties of kinship ( which Allah and His Messenger [ blessings and peace be upon him ] have commanded to strengthen with affection and care ) .
It is they whom Allah has cursed and made deaf ( their ears ) and blinded their eyes .
Do they not think over the Quran or are their hearts locked ?
Surely those who turned back ( to disbelief ) after the guidance had become clear to them , Satan ( by fraud ) made ( turning back to disbelief ) look good to them and gave them false hope of living long ( in the world ) .
That is because they said to those who dislike the Book revealed by Allah : We shall obey you in certain matters . And Allah knows best their secret consultations .
Then what will be ( their plight at the time ) when the angels will snatch out their souls ( this way ) that they will be striking their faces and their backs ?
That is because they followed that ( path ) which displeases Allah and disliked His good pleasure ; so He made ( all ) their actions null and void .
Do they who have the disease ( of hypocrisy ) in their hearts think that Allah will never make known their malice and hostilities ?
And if We will We can surely show these ( hypocrites ) to you ( in such a manner ) that you may recognize them by their facial expressions and ( likewise ) you may recognize them by their conversation style and Allah knows ( best ) all your actions .
And We shall certainly try you till We bring to light those of you who strive hard and fight ( firm - footed ) and who observe patience and expose your ( secret ) news ( of hypocritical cowardice ) as well .
Indeed those who disbelieved and hindered ( the people ) from the Way of Allah and opposed the Messenger [ blessings and peace be upon him ] , ( and chose the path of breaking away from him , ) after the guidance ( i . e . the gnosis of the veneration of the Holy Messenger [ blessings and peace be upon him ] ) had become clear to them , they would not be able to harm Allah anyway ( i . e . would not be able to decrease the incomparable superiority and pre - eminence of the Messenger [ blessings and peace be upon him ] ) . Allah will wreck ( all ) their works ( due to their opposition to the Holy Messenger [ blessings and peace be upon him ] ) .
O Believers ! Obey Allah and obey the Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) and do not ruin your works .
Indeed those who disbelieved and hindered ( the people ) from the Way of Allah and then died as disbelievers , Allah will never forgive them .
( O Blievers ! ) Do not lose heart and do not ask ( the warring disbelievers ) for peace ( lest it should suggest your weakness ) . And it is you who shall have the upper hand . And Allah is with you , and He will never reduce ( the reward of ) your actions .
Doubtlessly , the life of the world is nothing but merely a sport and pastime . And if you believe and adopt Godwariness , He will pay you the recompense ( of your deeds in full ) , and will not require of you your wealth .
If He asks you for this wealth and puts you under scarcity for that then you will feel constrained ( at heart and ) become miserly . And in this way He will expose your ( inner ) rust ( which results from worldly pursuits ) .
Remember ! You are those who are called to spend in the Way of Allah . Then there are some of you who act miserly . And whoever acts miserly , does it only against himself . And Allah is Independent and you ( all ) are dependent . And if you turn away from the Command of Allah , He will replace you with another people who will not be like you .
( O Esteemed Beloved ! ) Surely We decided for you a bright victory ( and the dominance of Islam so that your great struggle may be completed with success ) .
So that Allah may forgive , for your sake , all the earlier and later sins ( of all those people ) of your Umma ( Community , who struggled , fought and sacrificed by your command ) , and ( this way ) may complete His blessing on you ( outwardly and inwardly ) in the form of Islams victory and forgiveness for your Umma ( Community ) , and may keep ( your Umma ) firm - footed on the straight path ( through your mediation ) .
And so that Allah may grant you most honourable help and support .
He is the One Who sent down calmness and tranquillity into the hearts of the believers so that their faith gets increased with more faith ( and the faith learnt the knowledge of certitude changes into the faith seen - the eye of certitude ) . And all the armies of the heavens and the earth belong to Allah alone . And Allah is All - Knowing , Most Wise .
( All these favours are put together ) so that He may admit the believing men and women to the Gardens with streams flowing under them . They will live in them forever . And ( moreover ) He may remove from them their evil actions ( as He has forgiven them their mistakes ) . And this is a great success ( of the believers ) in the sight of Allah .
( And so that ) He may punish the hypocritical men and women and the polytheistic men and women who entertain evil assumptions about Allah . For them is ( predestined ) an evil turn of fortune . And Allah has afflicted them with His wrath , has cursed them and has prepared for them Hell . And that is a very evil resting place .
And all armies of the heavens and the earth belong to Allah alone . And Allah is Almighty , Most Wise .
Indeed We have sent you as an eyewitness ( of the actions and the state of affairs of Umma [ Community ] to bear testimony on the Day of Reckoning ) and as a Bearer of good news and as a Warner .
So that , ( O people , ) you may believe in Allah and His Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) and may help his ( Din [ Religion ] ) , and revere and venerate him heart and soul , and ( with that ) glorify Allah morning and evening .
( O Beloved ! ) Indeed those who pledge allegiance to you in fact pledge allegiance to Allah alone . Allahs hand is over their hands ( in the form of your hand ) . Then whoever breaks his pledge breaks it only to his own harm . But he who fulfils what he has promised to Allah , He will bless him with immense reward .
Soon the Bedouins who lagged behind ( from participating in al - Hudaibiya ) will say to you ( apologetically ) : Our money matters and families kept us busy . ( Therefore , we missed your company . ) So ask forgiveness for us from Allah . They utter such ( words ) with their tongues that are not in their hearts . Say : Who has the power to save you against ( the decision ) of Allah if He intends to do you harm or if He intends to do you good ? But Allah is Well Aware of what you do .
No , in fact you thought that the Messenger and the believers ( his Companions ) would never return to their families now and ( your ill - commanding selves ) made that ( thought ) seem to your hearts far fascinating . And you imagined a highly evil speculation and became a people bound to perish .
And whoever does not believe in Allah and His Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) , then We have prepared Hell for the disbelievers .
And the kingdom of the heavens and the earth belongs to Allah alone . He forgives whom He wills and punishes whom He wills . And Allah is Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
When you will set out to collect spoils ( of al - Khaibar ) , those who remained behind ( in the march towards al - Hudaibiya ) will say : Allow us also to follow you . They seek to alter Allahs Words . Say : You shall by no means follow us . Allah said the same beforehand . So now they will say : In fact you are jealous of us . The truth is that they understand ( the Truth ) but little .
Say to the Bedouins lagging behind : You will be called up soon ( to fight ) against a hard - hitting warring people . Then you will fight them on ( for the promotion of peace and human dignity ) or they will become Muslims . So if you obey the command , Allah will give you an excellent reward . But if you turn away as you did before , He will make you suffer from an agonizing torment .
There is no blame on the blind or the lame or the sick ( for missing fighting ) . And He who obeys Allah and His Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) , He will admit him to the Gardens with streams flowing under them . But whoever turns away ( from obedience ) , He will punish him with grievous torment .
Surely Allah was well pleased with the believers when they pledged allegiance to you under the tree ( at al - Hudaibiya ) . So the ( passion of truth and fidelity ) that permeated their hearts , Allah had its knowledge and sent down an exceptional calmness and tranquillity ( into their hearts and awarded them the forthcoming victory ( of Khaibar ) .
And ( also ) the abundant spoils that they are taking and Allah is Almighty , Most Wise .
And Allah has promised you abundant spoils ( resulting from many victories ) which you will win , but He has hastened to you this ( booty of Khaibar ) and has held back from you the hands of the people ( of Makka , Khaibar , Bani Asad and Ghatafan tribes and all other enemies ) , so that it may become a Sign for the believers ( of the forthcoming triumph and victory ) and that He may keep you treading the straight road ( firm - footed , and with the tranquillity of hearts ) .
And other ( big victories of Makka , Hawazin and Hunain , then Persia and Rome ) over which you had no power surely Allah has also encompassed them ( for you ) and Allah wields Absolute Power over everything .
And , ( O Blievers , ) if the disbelievers had fought with you ( at al - Hudaibiya ) , they would certainly have fled turning their backs and found no friend and helper . ( But Allah intended to open the door to you not only of this but many other victories as well . )
( This ) is Allahs pattern that has been established through time and you will never find any change in the Laws of Allah .
And He is the One Who held back the hands of those ( disbelievers ) from you and your hands from them on the frontier of Makka ( near al - Hudaibiya ) after giving you the upper hand over their ( party ) . And Allah best monitors what you do .
It is they who disbelieved and hindered you from the Sacred Mosque , and prevented the sacrificial animals as well that were kept from reaching their place . And had there not been many such believing men and women ( present in Makka ) as you also did not know that you might crush them underfoot without knowing , and some harm and hardship might also be caused to you by them inadvertently , ( We would have allowed you there and then to fight . But the victory of Makka was delayed ) so that Allah might admit to His Mercy whom He willed . Had ( the disbelievers and the believers there ) distinguishably drawn apart from one another , We would have punished the disbelievers with a painful torment .
While the disbelievers anchored in their hearts the conceited obstinacy ( which was ) stubbornness and egocentricity of the days of ignorance , Allah sent down on His Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) and the believers an exceptional calmness and tranquillity and made them firm on the Word of Godwariness . And it is this that they were most entitled to and ( also ) worthy of . And Allah knows everything full well .
Surely Allah showed to His Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) the dream exactly true to the reality that , if Allah wills , you will most certainly enter the Sacred Mosque safely , ( some ) with heads shaved and ( some ) with hair cut short , ( in a state of ) having no fear . So He knew ( the al - Hudaibiya Treaty as a preamble to the Truth of the dream ) which you did not know and gave you an immediate victory ( the victory of Khaibar even before the victory of Makka , soon after returning from al - Hudaibiya . The next year He bestowed the victory of Makka and entry to the Sacred Mosque . )
He is the One Who sent His Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) with guidance and the Din ( Religion ) of Truth to make it prevail over all other religions . And Allah is Sufficient as a witness ( to the Truthfulness and Trueness of the Messenger [ blessings and peace be upon him ] ) .
Muhammad ( blessings and peace be upon him ) is the Messenger of Allah . And those with him are hard and tough against the disbelievers but kind - hearted and merciful among themselves . You see them excessively bowing and prostrating themselves . They simply seek Allahs grace and pleasure . Their mark is an impression of prostrations on their faces ( prominent on the foreheads as light ) . These traits of theirs are ( mentioned ) in the Torah and the ( same ) qualities are also ( described ) in Injil ( the Gospel ) . These ( Companions ) are like a cultivated crop ( of Our Esteemed Beloved ) which ( first of all ) brought forth its thin shoot , then made it powerful and strong and then it thickened and stood straight on its stalk . ( And when it flourished , bloomed and danced ) it delighted and charmed the cultivators . ( Allah has , likewise , made the Companions of His Beloved strong , grown up Trees of Faith , ) so that by means of them He may make the hearts of the disbelievers blaze up ( that burn in the jealousy of the Holy Prophet Muhammad [ blessings and peace be upon him ] ) . Those who believe and do pious works , Allah has promised them forgiveness and an immense reward .
O Believers ! Do not step ahead of Allah and His Messenger ( [ blessings and peace be upon him ] in any matter ) and keep fearing Allah ( lest some discourtesy should occur displeasing the Messenger [ blessings and peace be upon him ] ) . Surely Allah is All - Hearing , All - Knowing .
O Believers ! Do not raise your voices above the voice of the Prophet ( blessings and peace be upon him ) and ( also ) do not speak to him so loud as you are loud when you speak to one another ( lest ) all your actions should come to nothing ( including your faith ) , and you are not even aware ( that your faith and all pious works have been wrecked ) .
Assuredly those who keep their voices low in the Presence of Allahs Messenger ( out of profound veneration and submissiveness ) , it is they whose hearts Allah has chosen for Godwariness and permeated with sincerity . For them alone is forgiveness and an immense reward .
Verily those who call out to you from outside your apartments , most of them do not have the understanding ( of your exalted station and incomparable status and polite manners of paying you most humble regards ) .
And if they had only been patient till you had come out to them , it would have been better for them . And Allah is Most Kind , Ever - Merciful .
O Believers ! If some wicked person brings you any news , inquire thoroughly into its truth ( lest ) you should cause ( undue ) harm to a people unknowingly , and later feel regret for what you have done .
And remember that the Messenger of Allah ( blessings and peace be upon him ) is among you . If he accepted what you say in most of the matters , you would be in serious trouble . But Allah has blessed you with the love of faith and has embelished it in your hearts and has made you hate disbelief , disobedience and sins . Such are they that follow the path of Din ( Religion ) resolutely and steadfastly .
( It ) is due to Allahs Bounty and Favour ( i . e . the raising of the untaught Messenger and his Presence among you ) . And Allah is All - Knowing , Most Wise .
And if two parties of the Muslims fight , make them reconcile . Then if either of these ( parties ) commits injustice and aggression against the other , fight against that ( party ) who are committing aggression till they turn to Allahs command . When they revert and submit , make peace between them with equity . And put justice to work . Surely Allah loves those who do justice .
The truth is that ( all ) believers are brothers ( to one another ) . So make peace between your two brothers and always fear Allah , so that you may be shown Mercy .
O Believers ! Let no community ridicule another community . It is likely that they may be better than those ( who ridicule ) . Nor should women make fun of other women . It is likely that they may be better than those ( who make fun ) . And do not offend or find fault with one another , nor call each other names . Calling someone wicked or indecent after ( he embraces ) faith is an extremely evil name . And those who do not turn to Allah in repentance it is they who are the wrongdoers .
O Believers ! Avoid most conjectures . Indeed some conjectures are sins ( liable to punishment in the Hereafter ) . And spy not ( on someones unknown matters or secrets ) , nor backbite one another . Would any of you like to eat the flesh of his dead brother ? You would hate it . And fear Allah ( in all such matters ) . Indeed Allah is Ever - Returning , Ever - Merciful .
O people ! We created you from a male and a female , and ( divided ) you into ( large ) peoples and tribes , so that you might recognize one another . Surely the most honourable among you in the sight of Allah is he who fears Allah most . Certainly Allah is All - Knowing , All - Aware .
The Bedouins say : We have believed . Say : You have not believed . Yes , rather say : We have accepted Islam . And the belief has not yet gone into your hearts . If you obey Allah and His Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) , He will not decrease anything ( in reward ) for your deeds . Surely Allah is Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
The true believers are only those who have believed in Allah and His Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) and then never get into doubt , and who fight in the way of Allah with their material as well as human resources . It is they who are true ( in their claim to believe ) .
Say : Are you trying to show off to Allah your Din ( Religion ) while Allah knows all that is in the heavens and in the earth ? And Allah is Well Aware of everything .
These people are showing off to you that they have done a favour to you by embracing Islam . Say : Do not show off your Islam as a favour to me . Instead , Allah is the One Who favours you by guiding you to faith provided you are true ( to belief ) .
Surely Allah knows all the unseen of the heavens and the earth , and Allah monitors best whatever you do .
/ 20 / 2009Qaf . ( Only Allah and the Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) know the real meaning . ) By the Glorious Quran .
But they wondered that a Warner had come to them from among themselves . So the disbelievers say : This is strange !
Is it that when we are dead and have become dust ( then we shall become alive again ) ? This return is far ( from understanding and perception ) .
Definitely We know how much the earth ( eats up and ) consumes their ( bodies ) and We have a Book wherein everything is preserved .
But ( strange and far from understanding is this that ) they denied the Truth ( i . e . the Messenger and the Quran ) when it came to them . So they have themselves stepped into anxiety and confusion .
Have they not looked at the sky above them how We made it and ( how ) adorned it , and there is no crack in it ?
And ( in the same way ) We spread out the earth and We placed in it heavy mountains and produced in it every kind of beautiful plants .
All that is ( a source of ) insight , direction and guidance for every servant who turns ( to Allah in repentance ) .
And We showered blessed water from the sky and then produced with it gardens and ( also ) the grain of harvests .
And date - palms soaring high with layers of spathes .
( This all is done as ) sustenance for the servants and We gave life with this ( water ) to the dead earth . In like manner is ( your ) coming forth from the graves .
Before these ( disbelievers of Makka ) the people of Nuh ( Noah ) and the People of the blind well ( ar - Rass in al - Yamama ) , and Thamud ( the People of Salih , in the town of al - Hijr near Tabuk on the Madina - Syria road ) .
And Ad ( the people of Hud in Ahqaf valley of Yemen situated between Oman and the al - Mahra ) and Pharaoh ( the ruler of Egypt ) and the People of Lut [ Lot ] ( living in Sodom and Amura [ Gomorrah ] in Palestine ) .
And the inhabitants of al - Aika ( the Wood in Madyan , the People of Shuaib ) and the people of Tubba ( the people of Asad Abu Kurib al - Himiri , the King of Yemen ) ( in sum ) all ( of them ) rejected the Messengers . So My promise of punishment ( against them ) proved true .
So are We tired by the first creation ? ( No way ! ) In fact it is they who are in doubt about the new creation .
Assuredly We created man and We know ( also ) the doubts which his ( ill - commanding ) self puts ( into his heart and mind ) . And We are nearer to him than his jugular vein .
When the two receivers receive ( the recording angels write down his every communication and work ) , sitting on the right and on the left .
Not a word does he utter with the mouth but a watcher is there beside him ready ( to write it ) .
And the stupor of death comes with the Truth . ( O man , ) that is what you were running away from !
And the Trumpet will be blown . It is this ( torment ) the Day of Warning .
And every soul will appear ( before Our Presence ) , one ( angel ) forcing it forward and ( the other ) a witness ( to its actions ) .
The truth is that you were negligent of this ( Day ) , so We have removed your veil ( of negligence ) and Today your sight is sharp .
And his close companion ( angel ) will say : That is what I have ready ( for you ) .
( It will be commanded : ) Both of you hurl into Hell every ( such ) ungrateful rebel .
Who hinders from good , exceeds the limits , doubts and puts into doubt .
Who had set up another god besides Allah . So hurl him into fierce torment .
( Now ) his ( other ) companion ( Satan ) will say : O our Lord , I did not misguide him . In fact he was himself suffering from misguidance of extreme degree .
Allah will say : Do not dispute in My Presence while I have already sent you the warning ( of punishment ) .
The Command is never changed in My Presence . And nor do I wrong the servants .
That Day We shall ask Hell : Are you filled up ? And it will say : Is there any more ?
And Paradise will be brought close to the pious ; it will not be distant at all .
( And it will be said to them : ) This is what you were promised ; ( it is meant ) for everyone who turns to Allah in repentance and who guards ( his Din [ Religion ] and Faith ) .
Who fears the Most Kind ( Lord ) unseen and comes ( before the Presence of Allah ) with a heart turned in repentance .
Enter it in peace ; this is the Day of Eternity .
All those blessings which they will long for will be there for them in that ( Paradise ) and there is still another blessing with Us ( or much more ; so the lovers will be enchanted ) .
And how many generations We destroyed before them ( the disbelievers and idolaters of Makka ) who were far stronger in power and might than they ! So they searched the cities ( of the world ) to run away somewhere for refuge ( from death or torment ) .
There is indeed sure warning and admonition in it for him who has a heart ( vigilant and awake , far from negligence , ) or listens with active attention ( i . e . focuses attention having no contact with anyone other than Allah ) and is in a state of ( spiritual ) vision ( i . e . remains lost in the effulgent disclosures of Allahs absolute beauty and charisma ) .
And surely We have created the heavens and the earth and that ( universe ) which is between the two in six periods and no fatigue has touched Us .
So be patient with what they say and glorify your Lord with praise before sunrise and before sunset .
And also glorify Him during some hours of the night and after the Prayers as well .
And listen attentively ( of the Day ) when a caller will call from a near place .
The Day when people will assuredly hear a mighty roar . That will be the Day of coming out from the graves .
Surely it is We Who give life and it is We Who cause death and to Us is the return .
The Day when the earth will split apart from above them , they will come out in haste . This raising them alive ( i . e . gathering the people once again ) is quite easy for Us .
We know best what they say and you are not the one to coerce them . So advise by means of the Quran anyone who fears My threat of punishment .
By the winds that blow and scatter .
And by the clouds that carry a heavy load ( of water ) .
And by the vessels that float with elegance .
And by the angels that distribute work .
Surely the promise ( of the Hereafter ) being made to you is absolutely true .
And surely the reward and the punishment ( of actions ) are bound to take place .
And by the heaven with its galaxies and orbits ( of stars and planets ) .
Certainly you are ( caught ) in inconsistent statements .
He alone turns away ( from the Holy Messenger and the Quran ) who is turned away ( from the knowledge of pre - eternity ) .
Ruined are those who tell lies out of assumption and conjecture .
Those who are oblivious ( of the Hereafter ) due to negligence and ignorance .
They ask : When is the Day of Requital ?
( Say : ) The Day ( when ) they will be roasted in the Fire of Hell .
( It will be said to them : ) Relish your punishment . It is this punishment which you seek to hasten .
Surely the pious will be ( rejoicing ) in gardens and springs .
Receiving those blessings ( in ecstatic delight ) which their Lord will be giving them ( with munificence and benevolence ) . Surely it is they who were people of spiritual excellence ( in their life ) before this .
They used to sleep at night only for a short while .
And used to ( get up and ) seek forgiveness in the later part of the night .
And in their wealth was appointed a due share for the beggars and the destitute ( i . e . all the needy ) .
And there are many Signs in the earth for the people with the truth of certitude ( i . e . people of perfect certitude ) .
And in your selves ( as well ) . So do you not notice ?
And ( also ) there is sustenance for you in the heaven and ( all that too ) which you are promised .
So , by the King of heavens and the earth , this ( promise of Ours ) is true just as is your speech . ( You firmly believe in what you utter . )
Has the news come to you of the venerable guests of Ibrahim ( Abraham ) ?
When those ( angels ) came to him they wished him peace ; Ibrahim ( Abraham ) also said ( in reply ) : Peace ( be upon you ) ! ( and thought in his mind that ) they were strangers .
Then he went to his home in haste and brought a healthy roasted calf .
Then he presented it to them and said : Will you not eat ?
Then he felt somewhat concerned about them ( when they did not eat ) . They ( angels ) said : Do not worry , then they gave him the news about a son possessing knowledge and wisdom ( Ishaq [ Isaac ] ) .
Then his wife ( Sara ) came with a voice laden with wonder and frustration , patted her forehead in astonishment and said : ( Will ) an old and barren woman ( give birth to a child ) ?
The ( angels ) said : It will happen exactly as your Lord has said ; surely He is Most Wise , All - Knowing .
Ibrahim ( Abraham ) said : O deputed angels , what is your basic intent ( of coming , apart from this good news ) ?
They said : We have been sent to the evildoing people ( the people of Lut [ Lot ] ) .
So that we may rain on them stones of baked clay .
( The stones ) that have been marked from your Lord for those who transgress .
Then We moved everyone who was of the believers in it out ( from the town of the People of Lut [ Lot ] ) .
So We did not find in that town ( any house ) of the Muslims except one ( in which were the Prophet Lut [ Lot ] and his two daughters ) .
And We made in that ( town ) a Sign to subsist ( as a lesson of warning ) for those who fear the grievous torment .
And ( there are Signs ) in ( the incident of ) Musa ( Moses ) as well when We sent him to Pharaoh with clear proof .
He turned away along with his cabinet members and said : ( Here is ) a magician or a madman .
Then We seized him and his army ( with torment ) , and drowned them ( all ) in the river . And he was but the perpetrator of condemnable works .
And there is ( a Sign ) in ( the destruction of ) the people of Ad too , when We sent upon them a wind devoid of any good and blessing .
Whatever it passed over , it did not leave without turning it to dust .
And also there is ( a Sign of warning ) in the ( destruction of ) the people of Thamud when they were told : Take benefit for an appointed term .
But they disobeyed the Command of their Lord . So a horrifying thunder seized them , and they could only stare it stunned .
Then they could neither gather strength to stand , nor could they take revenge ( on Us ) .
And ( We also destroyed ) the People of Nuh ( Noah ) before this . Surely they were a people extremely disobedient .
And We built the heavenly universe with great might . And surely We are expanding ( this universe ) more and more .
And We alone made ( the surface of the ) earth a ( livable ) floor . So how graciously We make up and spread out !
And of everything We have created two pairs so that you might concentrate and understand .
So run towards Allah . Surely I am a clear Warner to you from Him .
And do not set up any god apart from Allah . Surely I am a clear Warner to you from Him .
Likewise no Messenger came to those before them but they said the same : ( This is ) a magician or a madman .
Were they transmitting this advice to one another ? In truth they were ( all ) a disobedient and rebellious people .
So turn away your kind and caring looks from them . There is no blame on you ( for their disbelief ) .
And keep giving direction and guidance , for direction and guidance surely benefits the believers .
And I created the jinn and human beings solely to adopt My servitude .
I do not ask for any sustenance ( i . e . earning ) from them , nor do I require that they should feed Me .
Truly Allah alone is the Sustainer of everyone , the Lord of Great Might , the Most Strong . ( He does not need anyones help and assistance . )
So there is a fixed share of the torment for these wrongdoers ( too ) like the share of the torment of their companions ( who have passed before ) . So let them not ask Me to hasten ( it ) .
So a terrible destruction awaits the disbelievers on that Day of theirs which they have been promised .
By the ( Mountain ) at - Tur .
And by the Book inscribed .
( Which is ) on an Unfolded Scroll .
And by the House populated ( by the angels i . e . Kaba in heaven ) .
And by the Lofty Roof ( i . e . High Heaven or the Most Exalted Throne ) .
And by the swelling sea !
Surely the torment of your Lord will certainly take place .
No one can avert it .
The Day when the heaven will shake with a terrible tremor .
And the mountains ( leaving their locations ) will fly fast ( like clouds ) and scatter ( like dust particles ) .
So on that Day woe to those who belie .
Those who are playing a game of negligence , rapt in falsehood ( absurdity ) .
The Day when they will be forcefully pushed towards the Fire of Hell .
( It will be said to them : ) This is the Fire of Hell you used to belie .
So is it magic or do you not see ?
Enter it . Then it is all the same for you whether you observe patience or you do not observe patience . You will be paid only for those deeds which you used to do .
Surely the Godfearing people will be in the Gardens and Bliss .
They will be delighted at and rejoicing in the ( bestowals ) their Lord will have blessed them with . And their Lord will keep them safe from the punishment of Hell .
( It will be said to them : ) Relish food and drink as reward of the ( pious ) deeds which you used to do .
They will be reclining ( sitting ) on couches arranged in rows and We will marry them to maidens with fair colour ( and ) fascinating eyes .
And those who believe and their children follow them in faith , We shall unite their children also with them ( in the ranks of Paradise even if their actions would not fall in that grade . It would be in the honour of their pious fathers ) . And We will also not reduce anyway the reward of the actions of their ( pious fathers . Besides this , ) everyone will be held in ( reward and punishment of ) his own works .
And We will keep giving them fruits and meat more and more as they desire .
There , they will take the cups ( of holy drink ) by grabbing . This ( holy drink of Paradise ) will be free of foolish talk and sinful acts .
And ( the serving ) youths will go round them , as if they were pearls kept hidden in covers .
And they will turn to one another enquiring well - being .
They will say : Surely before this we used to live in fear ( of Allahs torment ) in our homes .
So Allah has been Gracious to favour us and has saved us from the punishment of the Fire of Hell .
Indeed we used to worship Him alone beforehand . Surely He is Most Gracious , Ever - Merciful .
So , ( O Esteemed Beloved , ) continue to admonish ( them ) . By the grace and blessing of your Lord you are neither a soothsayer ( i . e . the one who gives news through the jinn ) nor a madman .
Do the disbelievers say : ( He is ) a poet for whom we look forward to some temporal disasters ?
Say : Wait on , I am also waiting together with you ( for your destruction ) .
Do their mental faculties suggest them this ( foolishness ) or are they rioters and rebels ?
Or do they say : He ( the Messenger ) has invented it ( the Quran ) himself ? ( No indeed ; ) rather they simply do not believe ( in the Truth ) .
So let them produce a treatise like this ( Quran ) if they are truthful .
Have they been created by nothing or are they themselves the creators ?
Or did they create the heavens and the earth themselves ? ( No indeed ; ) in fact they do not have any faith ( in the Truth ) .
Or do they own the treasures of your Lord ? Or are they guards and watchmen over them ?
Or do they have any ladder ( by which they ascend ) and listen stealthily ( to the heaven ) ? So let the listener among them bring the clear proof .
Are there daughters for Him ( the Lord ) and sons for you ?
Do you ask them for wages that they are weighed down with debt ?
Do they have ( the knowledge of ) the unseen that they write down ?
Do they seek to deceive ( you ) by trick ? Those who disbelieve are being caught in their own trap .
Do they have any god other than Allah ? Glory be to Allah , above all what they set up as a partner ( with Allah ) .
And if they see a fragment of the sky falling ( on them , even then ) they will say : It is a layered ( thick ) cloud .
So leave them ( in their plight ) till they meet that Day of theirs when they will be destroyed .
The Day when their plots will be of no use for them , nor will they be helped .
And for those who are committed to doing wrong , there is a torment for them besides this torment as well but most of them do not know .
And , ( O Esteemed Beloved , do not grieve over what they say ) . Wait patiently for the Command of your Lord . Surely you are ( at all times ) before Our eyes . And glorify your Lord with His praise whenever you stand forth .
And also glorify Him during the hours of the night and ( in later part of it ) when the stars fade out .
By the bright star ( Muhammad [ blessings and peace be upon him ] ) when ( he ascended during the Ascension Night in the twinkling of an eye and ) descended .
He who bestowed on you his companionship ( i . e . the Messenger , who made you his companions by blessing you with his companionship , ) has never lost his way , nor has he ( ever ) strayed from the right path .
He does not speak out of his ( own ) desire .
His speech is nothing but outright Revelation , which is sent to him .
( The Lord ) of Mighty Powers ( directly ) conferred on him ( perfect ) knowledge .
He Who is absolute beauty . Then He ( the Effulgence of Beauty ) decided to unveil ( Himself ) .
And he ( Muhammad [ blessings and peace be upon him ] ) was on the uppermost horizon ( of the realm of creation during the Ascension Night i . e . on the apex of the created cosmos ) .
Then He ( the Lord of Honour ) drew closer ( to His Beloved Muhammad [ blessings and peace be upon him ] ) , and then drew even closer .
Then a distance measuring only two bow - lengths was left ( between Allah Unveiled and His Esteemed Beloved ) or even less than that ( in extreme nearness ) .
So ( on that station of nearness and union ) He ( Allah ) revealed to His ( Beloved ) servant whatever He revealed .
( His ) heart did not take it contrary to what ( his ) eyes beheld .
Do you argue with him about what he saw ?
And assuredly he saw Him ( Allah Unveiled ) the second time ( again and you argue only about seeing Him once ) .
At the farthest Lote - Tree Sidrat al - Muntaha .
Adjacent to that is the Eternal Paradise - Jannat al - Mawa .
When theophanies ( i . e . Effulgent Disclosures ) of the Divine Light wrapped up as - Sidra ( the Lote - Tree at the Far End ) , covering it expansively .
And his eye neither inclined aside nor overstepped the limit ; ( it gazed in ecstasy at Whom it was to gaze ) .
Surely he saw the Greatest Signs of His Lord ( during the Ascension Night ) .
Have you taken a look at ( the goddesses ) Lat and Uzza ?
And ( have you ) also ( seen thoughtfully ) another , that third one ( goddess ) Manat ? ( Have you declared them daughters of Allah ? )
( O idolaters ! ) Are sons for you and daughters for Him ( Allah ) ?
( If your concept is correct ) then that division is serious injustice .
But ( the truth is that ) these ( idols ) are nothing but mere names which you and your fathers have given . Allah has not sent down any authority for them . They follow only whims and suspicions and the desires of their ( ill - commanding ) selves whereas Guidance has already come to them from their Lord .
Is ( all ) that available for man what he longs for ` ?
So Allah alone is the Master of the Hereafter and the world .
And how many angels there are in the heavens ( whom the disbelievers and the idolaters worship and expect from them intercession but ) whose intercession will be of no use at all , except after Allah ( awards ) permission for whom He wills and likes !
Surely those who do not believe in the Hereafter give the angels female names .
And they know nothing about it . They follow only assumption and surely assumption serves no purpose in comparison with certitude .
So divert your attention from him who turns away from Our Remembrance and desires nothing but the life of this world .
That is but the limit of the working of their knowledge . Verily your Lord fully knows him who has strayed from His path and ( also ) knows best him who has attained guidance .
And to Allah belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth so that He recompenses the acts of those who have committed vices and gives good reward to those who have performed virtues .
Those who guard against grave sins and indecencies excepting small sins ( and omissions ) , surely your Lord has vast prospects of forgiveness ( for them ) . He knows you best when He originated your life and nourishment from the earth ( i . e . soil ) and when you were embryos ( conceived ) in your mothers wombs . So never pose yourselves as clean and pure ; He knows best who is ( really ) pious .
Have you seen him who has turned away ( from the Truth ) ?
And he gave away a little ( wealth in the way of Allah ) and ( then ) held back ( his hand ) ?
Does he have the knowledge of the unseen that he can see ?
Has he not been given the knowledge of ( matters ) mentioned in the scriptures of Musa ( Moses ) .
And in the ( scriptures ) of Ibrahim ( Abraham ) who accomplished ( all the Commands of Allah ) with perfection ?
That no bearer of a burden will carry the burden of ( the sins ) of another .
And that man ( according to justice ) will get only that for which he will have strived . ( As for Bounty , no one has any right to it . That is merely Allahs bestowal and pleasure , granting as much as He wills to whom He may please . )
And that all his endeavours will soon be shown ( i . e . exposed ) .
Then he will be given full reward ( for all his endeavours ) .
And that ( ultimately all ) have to return to your Lord .
And that He is the One Who makes one laugh ( granting delight ) and makes one weep ( granting grief ) .
And that He is the One Who causes death and gives life .
And that He is the One Who has created the two genders , male and female .
Out of a ( sperm ) drop when it is ejaculated ( into the mothers womb ) .
And that it is upon Him alone to raise up alive ( also after death ) .
And that He is the One Who makes self - sufficient ( by providing according to needs ) and He is the One Who enriches treasures ( by giving surplus to the needs ) .
And that He alone is the Lord of Sirius ( a star that was worshipped in the days of ignorance ) .
And that He is the One Who destroyed the first ( people of ) Ad .
And ( the people of ) Thamud ( as well ) . Then he did not spare ( anyone of them ) to survive .
And before that He destroyed the people of Nuh ( Noah as well ) . Surely they were extremely wicked and exceedingly defiant .
And He is the One Who ( raised up ) the overturned towns ( of the people of Lut [ Lot ] ) and smashed them down .
Then that covered them which did cover ( i . e . the stones were rained on them ) .
So , ( O man , ) which of the favours of your Lord will you doubt ?
This ( Holy Prophet [ blessings and peace be upon him ] ) is also a Warner of the Warners of old .
The imminent ( Hour of Judgment ) has drawn near .
No one except Allah can bring it forth ( and establish ) .
So do you wonder at this Revelation ?
And do you laugh and not weep .
While you are busy playing a game ( of negligence ) ?
So prostrate yourselves before Allah and worship ( Him ) .
The Last Hour has drawn near and the moon has split into two .
And if they ( the disbelievers ) see a Sign ( miracle ) they turn their faces away and say : This is the powerful magic ever running down through ages .
And they have rejected ( the Truth even now ) and followed their vain desires . And everything ( that has been promised ) is to take place at the appointed time .
And indeed the news has come to them ( of the earlier communities ) containing lessons of warning and admonition ( on disbelief and disobedience ) .
( This Quran ) is perfect intellect and reason . Are the Warners still not of any benefit ?
So turn your face away from them . The Day when the caller ( angel ) will call towards the most detestable thing ( the expanse of the last assembly ) .
With eyes cast down , they will come out of their graves like scattered locusts .
Rushing towards the caller running . The disbelievers would say : This is a very hard Day .
The People of Nuh ( Noah ) also denied before this . So they belied Our servant ( Nuh Noah , the Messenger ) and said : ( He ) is mad . And he was given threats .
So he prayed to his Lord : I am powerless ( before the transgressions of my people ) so exact revenge .
Then We opened the gates of heaven with torrential rain .
And We burst springs from the earth . So the water ( of the earth and the heaven ) collected for the same purpose that had been decreed already ( for their destruction ) .
And We carried him ( Nuh Noah ) in the ( Ark ) built with planks and nails .
Which floated before Our eyes ( under Our security . All this ) was done to exact revenge for him Nuh ( Noah ) who was rejected .
And surely We made ( the ruins of the Deluge ) subsist as a Sign . So is there anyone who will think ( and take advice ) ?
So how My torment and My warning were !
And indeed We have made the Quran easy for direction and guidance , but is there anyone who will take advice ?
( The people of ) Ad too rejected ( the Messengers ) . So how ( awful ) My torment ( upon them ) and My Warning were !
Surely We sent upon them a howling windstorm on a day of lasting evil ( in their favour ) .
That plucked out people as if they were uprooted stems of date - palms .
Then how ( awful ) My Torment and My Warning were !
And indeed We have made the Quran easy for direction and guidance , but is there anyone who will take advice ?
( The people of ) Thamud also rejected the Warning Messengers .
So they said : Are we to follow a human being who is one of us ? Then we shall certainly run into error and insanity .
Has the direction and guidance ( Revelation ) been sent down to him alone out of all of us ? The truth is that he is a great liar , self - conceited ( and arrogant ) .
They will come to know tomorrow ( on the Day of Judgment ) who is a great liar and self - conceited ( and arrogant ) .
Indeed We are going to send a she - camel for them to test them . So , ( O Salih , ) wait for their ( end ) and continue observing patience .
Make it known to them that water has been divided between them ( and the she - camel ) . Everyone will be served with the share of water by his turn .
So they called one of their companions ( named Qidar ) . He attacked ( the she - camel with a sword ) and hamstrung her .
Then how ( awful ) My Torment and My Warning were !
Verily We sent upon them a terrible roar . So they became like a thatchers trampled stubble .
And indeed We have made the Quran easy for direction and guidance , but is there anyone who will take advice ?
The People of Lut ( Lot ) also rejected the Warners .
Surely We sent a windstorm raining stones upon them except the family of Lut ( Lot ) . We saved them ( from the torment ) in the later part of the night .
With a special favour from Us . In the same way We give reward to him who gives thanks .
And no doubt Lut ( Lot ) warned them of Our seizure but , having doubts about his warnings , they denied .
And indeed they made up their minds to snatch from Lut ( Lot ) his guests . So We erased the structure of their eyes and stripped them of sight , then ( said to them : ) Taste My punishment and warning .
And surely the everlasting punishment reached them early in the morning .
Then ( it was said to them : ) Taste My punishment and warning .
And indeed We have made the Quran easy for direction and guidance , but is there anyone who will take advice ?
And surely the Warners came to the People of Pharaoh ( as well ) .
They denied all Our Signs . Then We seized them with the seizure befitting the Glory of Almighty , All - Powerful .
( O Quraish of Makka ! ) Are your disbelievers better than the people ( before ) or has your salvation been written in the ( Revealed ) Books ?
Or do these ( disbelievers ) say : We are a strong party dominant ( over the Holy Prophet [ blessings and peace be upon him ] ) ?
Soon this party will be defeated ( in the battlefield of Badr ) and they will flee away turning their backs .
But their ( actual ) promise is the Last Hour and the Last Hour is extremely terrible and most agonizing .
Assuredly , the evildoers are in ( the fold of ) error and insanity ( or Fire ) .
The Day when they will be dragged into Hell on their faces , ( it will be said to them : ) Taste burning in Hell .
Surely We have created everything according to a fixed measure .
And Our Command comes into action once and for all as the twinkling of an eye .
And surely We destroyed ( many of ) your groups . So is there anyone who will take advice ?
And whatever they did is ( recorded ) in ( their ) Books of Deeds .
And every ( action ) small or big has been written .
Indeed the Godfearing will ( rejoice ) in gardens and streams .
And will ( be seated ) in special nearness to the Sovereign Lord of ( true ) Power during holy sessions .
The Most Compassionate ( is He ) .
Who ( Himself ) taught the Quran to ( the Arab Messenger [ blessings and peace be upon him ] ) .
He is the One Who created ( this Absolutely Perfect ) man .
He alone taught him the art of expression and communication ( i . e . taught the True Messenger ma kana wa ma yakun )
The sun and the moon are rotating according to the configuration determined ( by Him ) .
And the herbs spread over the earth and all ( species of ) the trees prostrate themselves ( to Him alone ) .
And He is the One Who has maintained the sky raised high and ( He is the One ) Who has set up the balance ( for justice ) .
So that you violate not the balance while weighing .
And keep weighing justly and do not make the balance fall short .
He is the One Who has spread out the earth for the creatures .
There are fruits in it and blossom - bearing date - palms .
And chaff - covered grain and fragrant ( fruits ) blooms .
So , ( O assembly of jinn and men , ) which of your Lords blessings will you deny ?
He is the One Who created man from a dry mud sounding like earthenware .
And created the jinn from a flame of fire .
So which of your Lords blessings will you both deny ?
( He alone is ) the Lord of both the easts and ( He alone is ) the Lord of both the wests .
So which of your Lords blessings will you both deny ?
He is the One Who has made the two seas flow that join each other .
There is a barrier between them ; they cannot breach ( their respective ) limits .
So which of your Lords blessings will you both deny ?
The pearls ( shading green ) and corals ( shading red ) come forth from both ( the seas ) .
So which of your Lords blessings will you both deny ?
( Under ) His ( control ) are ( also ) the big vessels with lofty sails raised high ( anchoring or sailing ) in the sea like mountains .
So which of your Lords blessings will you both deny ?
Whoever is on the earth will perish .
And the Essence of your Lord , Who is the Master of Glory and Splendour and the Master of Bounty and Honour will remain .
So which of your Lords blessings will you both deny ?
All that are in the heavens and the earth beg from Him alone . Every moment His Glory manifests anew .
So which of your Lords blessings will you both deny ?
O both the groups ( of men and jinn , ) soon shall We attend to your account .
So which of your Lords blessings will you both deny ?
O company of the jinn and men ! If you have the power to go across the boundaries of the heaven and the earth ( and overpower the universe ) , then go ahead . Whichever station ( heavenly sphere ) you will go to , there too will be His Kingdom alone .
So which of your Lords blessings will you both deny ?
The flames of pure ( i . e . smokeless ) fire will be sent upon both of you and ( flameless ) smoke ( too will be sent ) and you both will be unable to escape from them .
So which of your Lords blessings will you both deny ?
And when heavens will split apart and will become rosy like burnt oil ( or red leather ) .
So which of your Lords blessings will you both deny ?
That Day no man or jinn will be asked about his sin .
So which of your Lords blessings will you both deny ?
The evildoers will be recognized by the darkness of their faces and so they will be pulled , seized by their forelocks and feet .
So which of your Lords blessings will you both deny ?
( It will be said to them : ) It is this Hell which the evildoers used to deny .
They will move about in that ( Hell ) and in the boiling hot water .
So which of your Lords blessings will you both deny ?
And whoever fears standing before his Lord ( for Meeting ) , for him are two Gardens .
So which of your Lords blessings will you both deny ?
They are ( green and fresh Gardens ) with deep thick branches .
So which of your Lords blessings will you both deny ?
Two springs are flowing in both of them .
So which of your Lords blessings will you both deny ?
In them are two kinds of every fruit .
So which of your Lords blessings will you both deny ?
The residents of Paradise will be reclining on couches lined with fine and thick brocade ( i . e . satin ) and the fruits of both the Gardens will be hanging low ( over them ) .
So which of your Lords blessings will you both deny ?
And in them will be ( chaste maidens ) with downcast looks , untouched either by any man or by any jinn .
So which of your Lords blessings will you both deny ?
As if they ( chaste maidens ) were rubies and pearls .
So which of your Lords blessings will you both deny ?
The reward of good cannot be anything but good .
So which of your Lords blessings will you both deny ?
And apart from these two there are also two more gardens ( for them ) .
So which of your Lords blessings will you both deny ?
Both appear deep green tinting black .
So which of your Lords blessings will you both deny ?
There are two springs which will be gushing with force in these two ( as well ) .
So which of your Lords blessings will you both deny ?
In them also there are fruits , date - palms and pomegranates .
So which of your Lords blessings will you both deny ?
In them are pious and beautiful ( chaste maidens as well ) .
So which of your Lords blessings will you both deny ?
The maidens who are veiling , confined in tents .
So which of your Lords blessings will you both deny ?
Untouched before either by any man or jinn .
So which of your Lords blessings will you both deny ?
( The residents of Paradise ) will be ( sitting ) reclining on cushions over green carpets and rare and exquisite fine rugs .
So which of your Lords blessings will you both deny ?
Most Blessed is the Name of your Lord , the Master of Glory and Splendour and the Master of Bounty and Honour .
When what is to occur ( the Hour of Resurrection ) will occur .
There is no falsehood in its occurrence .
( That Hour ) will lower ( some ) and raise ( some others ) high .
When the earth will tremor and then shake violently .
And the mountains will be crumbled into bits .
Then will become dust particles spread in the air .
And you will be divided into three classes .
So ( first ) those on the Right Hand ; what a class will the Right Hand be !
And ( second ) those on the Left Hand ; ( in what miserable plight will be ) the Left Hand party !
And ( third ) the Excellent ; ( they ) are the foremost .
It is they who will be the Near Ones ( to Allah ) .
( They will live ) in the Gardens of Bliss .
A large group ( of these Near Ones ) will be from the earlier people .
And a small number ( among them ) will be from the later generations .
( These Near Ones ) will be on the thrones ornamented with gold .
Reclining there on cushions , face to face .
The serving youths rapt always in the same state of being will go round them .
( They will be attending ) carrying bowls , ewers and cups filled with ( transparent ) drink of ( nearness ) from the free - flowing springs .
By ( drinking ) this they will have neither headache nor derangement of senses ( and stupefaction ) .
And ( the servants of Paradise ) will be ( roaming about ) with fruits which ( the Near Ones ) will like .
And ( there will be ) bird - meat as well which they ( the Near Ones ) will desire .
And also ( in their companionship will be ) maidens with wide lovely eyes .
Like pearls kept hidden , well - guarded .
( That ) will be the reward of the ( pious ) works which they used to do .
There they will hear nothing absurd nor any word of sin .
But ( these people of Peace will hear ) only one thing ( from all sides : ) Peace , Peace .
And those of the Right Hand ; what a class the Right Hand are !
Amid thornless lote - trees .
And layers of banana fruit .
And long - stretching , ( wide - spreading ) shades .
And flowing , gushing waters .
And ( they will be rejoicing ) in abundance of fruits .
They will be neither exhausted nor restricted ( to eat ) .
And ( they ) will be ( staying ) on raised ( splendid ) floors .
Surely We have created these ( maidens ) as a special creation ( reflecting beauty and refinement ) .
Then We have made them virgins .
The ardently loving ( wives ) of the same age .
These ( maidens and other bounties ) are for those on the Right Hand .
A large group of them will be from the earlier people .
And from later generations ( also ) will be a large group ( among them ) .
And those of the Left Hand ; what ( an evil people ) on the Left Hand are !
They will be amid fierce hot wind of Hell and simmering water .
And under the shadow of black smoke .
That will neither ( ever ) cool nor be pleasing .
No doubt , these ( inmates of Hell ) lived luxuriously before this ( in the world ) .
And obstinately persisted in great sin ( of denying Allah and setting up partners with Him ) .
And they used to say : When we are dead and become ( a heap of ) dust and ( decomposed bones ) , shall we then be raised up ( alive again ) ?
And shall our ancestors too ( be given life ) ?
Say : Indeed the earlier and the later .
( All of them ) will be gathered together on a fixed Hour of an appointed Day .
Then surely , O strayed people , deniers .
You will certainly eat of thorny ( cactus ) tree .
And will fill your stomachs with it .
And ( you ) will drink boiling water over it .
Drinking as a thirst - stricken camel drinks .
This will be their feast on the Day of Resurrection .
It is We Who created you then why do you not confirm ( resurrection ) ?
Well , give your view : the semen ( sperm drop ) that you ejaculate ( into the womb )
So is it you who create ( a human being ) from it or are We the Creator ?
It is We Who have decreed death among you and We are not helpless either ( to bring you back to life after this ) .
Nor are We ( powerless ) to change others into the like of you in your place and make you grow into a form which you do not know .
And surely you have learnt ( the reality of ) the first creation . Then why do you not accept advice ?
Well , give your view : the ( seed ) that you cultivate
So is it you who make ( the crop ) grow from it or are We its Grower ?
If We so intend We would crumble it to pieces . Then you would only be struck with awe and shame !
( And you may say : ) We are punished with ransom .
Rather we are seized by misfortune .
Well , give your view : the water that you drink
Have you sent it down from the cloud or are We its Sender ?
If We will , We can make it bitter . Then why do you not give thanks ?
Well , give your view : the fire that you kindle
Have you grown its tree or are We its Grower ?
It is We Who have made it ( the fire of tree ) a reminder ( of the Fire of Hell , an admonition and a warning ) and a source of profit and comfort for the travellers of forests .
So always glorify the Name of your Lord , Most Magnificent .
So I swear by the places where different portions of the Quran descend ( on the Arab Messenger ) .
And this is a mighty oath if you realize .
Surely this is a Glorious Quran ( which is being sent down on the most Glorious Messenger [ blessings and peace be upon him ] ) .
It has been ( inscribed ) on al - Lawh al - Mahfuz ( the Preserved Tablet ) before this .
No one can touch it except the purified ( cleansed ) ones .
It has been sent down by the Lord of all the worlds .
So is it this Revelation that you disdain ?
And you have made your means of subsistence ( and fortune ) to reject it !
Then why do you not ( make the soul return ) when it reaches the throat ( to pass away ) ?
And at that moment , you do nothing but helplessly look on !
And We are nearer to him ( the dying one ) than you but you do not see ( Us ) .
Then if you are under no ones command and control , why do you not ( do this ) .
That you turn that soul back if you are truthful ?
Then if he ( who died ) was of the Near Ones .
For him is Paradise packed with bounties , pleasure and delight and spiritual sustenance and comforts .
And if he was of those on the Right Hand .
Then ( it will be said to him : ) Peace for you from those on the Right Hand . ( Or , O Prophet , peace on you from those on the Right Hand . )
But if he ( who died ) was of the strayed beliers .
Then he will be entertained with scalding boiling water .
And his ( end ) is the admission to Hell .
Assuredly this is the absolute Truth of Certitude .
So always glorify the Name of your Lord , Most Magnificent .
All those who are in the heavens and the earth glorify Allah alone and only He is the Lord of Honour , Most Wise .
His is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth . He is the One Who gives life and causes death , and He wields Absolute Power over everything .
He is the One Who is the First ( of all ) and the Last ( of all ) . And He is Manifest ( as for His Power ) and Hidden ( as goes His Essence ) . And He knows everything full well .
He is the One Who created the heavens and the earth in six periods , then unveiled His Might taking the Throne of Authority of the Universe ( i . e . organized the whole universe under His Command befitting His Glory ) . He knows what goes into the earth and what comes out of it , and what descends ( or comes forth ) from the heavenly bodies or what ascends to ( or goes into ) them . Wherever you are He is with you . And Allah monitors best what you do .
His is the entire kingdom of the heavens and the earth and to Him are returned all the affairs .
He is the One Who makes the night pass into the day and the day pass into the night . And He is also Well Aware of the ( hidden ) contents of the hearts .
Believe in Allah and His Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) and spend ( in His cause ) out of that ( wealth ) in which He has made you His vicegerents ( and trustees ) . So those of you who believe and spend ( in His Way ) for them is mighty reward .
And what is the matter with you that you do not believe in Allah while the Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) is giving you the call to believe in your Lord ? And surely Allah has already taken a firm covenant from you if you are the believers .
He is the One Who sends down clear Signs to His ( exalted ) servant so that He may bring you out of darkness into the light . Surely Allah is the Most Clement , Ever - Merciful towards you .
And what is the matter with you that you do not spend in the Way of Allah whereas the ownership of the heavens and the earth belongs to Allah alone ( you are merely His vicegerents ) ? Those of you who spent ( their wealth in the Way of Allah before Makkan Victory ) and fought , they ( and you ) cannot be equal . They are far higher in rank than those who spent their wealth afterwards and fought . But Allah has promised the most pleasing end ( i . e . Paradise ) to all in the Hereafter . And Allah is Well Aware of what you do .
Who will make a good loan to Allah so that He may increase it ( the loan ) for him manifold ? And a generous reward awaits him .
( O Beloved ! ) The Day when you will see the believing men and the believing women ( of your Umma [ Community ] ) with their light heading fast in front of them and on their right , ( it will be said to them : ) Good news to you . Today there are Gardens for you with streams flowing under them . ( You ) will live in them forever . That is but a great success .
The Day when the hypocritical men and the hypocritical women will say to the believers : Look towards us ( also a little considerately ) so that we may take some of your light , it will be said to them : Go back and look for light ( there where you used to deny light ) . So a wall will be raised between them ( just then ) with a door in it . Inside it will be mercy and outside it will be torment from that direction .
They ( the hypocrites ) will call out those ( believers ) , saying : Were we not in your company ( in the world ) ? They will say : Yes indeed ! But you troubled yourselves with the disruption ( of hypocrisy ) and used to wait ( for our woe and destruction ) . And you doubted ( the Prophethood of Muhammad [ blessings and peace be upon him ] and Din [ Religion of Islam ] ) and your false hopes deceived you till the command of Allah ( death ) reached and the Arch - Deceiver ( Satan ) kept deluding you about Allah .
So today , ( O hypocrites , ) no recompense will be accepted from you or from those who disbelieved . Hell is the abode for you ( all ) . And it is this ( abode ) which is your mawla ( i . e . companion ) . And quite an evil resort is that , ( because you denied accepting those as mawla from whom the charity of the light of faith and forgiveness is obtained ) .
Has the time not ( yet ) come for the believers that their hearts get humbled with tenderness for the remembrance of Allah , and for that Truth ( as well ) which has been sent down , and that they do not become like those who were given the Book before this , then a long time passed over them and their hearts hardened ? And many of them are disobedient .
Know that Allah alone brings the earth to life after it is dead . And surely We have made Signs clear for you so that you may put your reason to work .
Surely both the men and the women who give charity and those who lend a goodly loan to Allah , the ( reward of charity ) will be increased for them manifold , and there shall be most honourable reward for them .
And those who believe in Allah and His Messengers are as - Siddiqun ( the Champions of Truth ) and ash - Shuhada ( the Faithful Witnesses ) in the sight of their Lord . For them is their reward and their light ( as well ) , and those who disbelieved and denied Our Revelations it is they who are the inmates of Hell .
Know that the life of the world is nothing but a sport and pastime , and superficial beauty , and mutual boasting and self - praise , and ambition to excel in wealth and children over one another . Its similitude is rain whose produce pleases the farmers . Then it dries up . Then you see it turning yellow and then it becomes bits of stubble . And there is severe torment ( for the disobedient ) in the Hereafter and forgiveness and great pleasure from Allah ( for the obedient ) . And the life of the world is nothing but belongings that deceive .
( O servants ! ) Race in pursuit of forgiveness from your Lord and towards Paradise ( also ) which is as wide as the vast expanse of the heaven and the earth , prepared for those who believe in Allah and His Messengers . This is Allahs Bounty which He gives to whom He wills . And Allah is the Lord of Infinite Bounty .
No calamity occurs in the earth or in your lives but it is in a Book ( al - Lawh al - Mahfuz , the station of Allahs pre - eternal knowledge , ) before We make it happen . Surely this ( all - encompassing and perfect knowledge ) is very easy for Allah .
So that you may not grieve over what goes out of your hands , nor gloat in pride over what He grants you . And Allah does not like anyone arrogant and proud
They who are ( themselves ) miserly and ( also ) urge others to be miserly . And he who turns away from ( Allahs Injunctions ) , then surely Allah is ( also ) Self - Sufficient , Most Praiseworthy .
Verily We sent Our Messengers with clear Signs and We sent down with them the Book and the Balance of Justice so that people may grow firm and stable in justice . And ( of minerals ) We brought forth iron in which is fierce force ( for weapons and defence ) and which has ( multiple other ) benefits for people ( in industrial development ) . And ( the purpose is ) that Allah may bring to light who helps Him and His Messengers ( i . e . Din [ Religion of Islam ] ) without seeing . Surely Allah is ( Himself ) the All - Powerful , the Almighty .
And indeed We sent Nuh ( Noah ) and Ibrahim ( Abraham ) and We placed Prophethood and the Revealed Book among their children . So ( some ) of them are rightly guided and most of them are disobedient .
Then in the footsteps of these Messengers we sent ( other ) Messengers and We sent Isa son of Maryam ( Jesus son of Mary ) after them and gave him the Injil ( the Gospel ) . And We created kindness and mercy in the hearts of those who were ( the true ) followers ( of Isa [ Jesus ] ) . And they themselves invented the innovation of monasticism ( living the life of a recluse and committing to asceticism and austerity ) . We did not prescribe it for them . But they ( introduced this innovation of monasticism ) merely to seek Allahs pleasure . Then they could not practically keep and maintain that check which was its due ( i . e . could not continue its spirit and discipline ) . So We paid those of them their reward who believed ( and continued the innovation of monasticism to seek the pleasure of Allah ) . And most of them ( who left it and changed their ways ) are disobedient .
O Believers ! Become Godfearing and believe in His ( Esteemed ) Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) . He will bless you with two portions of His Mercy and will bring about light for you to walk in ( in the world and in the Hereafter ) and will forgive you . And Allah is Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
( The purpose of this exposition is ) that the People of the Book may know that they have no control over Allahs Bounty and that the entire Bounty is in the Mighty Hand of Allah alone . He gives it to whom He likes and Allah is the Lord of Infinite Bounty , Most Great .
Indeed Allah has heard the words of the woman who was arguing with you about her husband and was pleading with Allah . And Allah was hearing the mutual questions and answers of both of you . Surely Allah is All - Hearing , All - Seeing .
Those of you who separate their wives by Zihar ( i . e . they say to their wives : You are to me as my mothers back . But by saying this ) they do not become their mothers . Their mothers are only those who have given them birth . And no doubt they utter evil and false words . Surely Allah is Most Forbearing , Most Forgiving .
And those who separate their wives by Zihar but then seek to go back on what they have said , setting free a neck ( a slave or a slave girl ) is obligatory before they touch each other . This is what you are admonished . And Allah is Well Aware of the works that you do .
But the one who does not find ( a slave or a slave girl ) must fast for two consecutive months ( as an obligation ) before they touch each other . Then someone who is unable to do that must feed sixty poor people ( under obligation ) . That is in order that you may keep your belief in Allah and His Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) . And these are the limits ( set by ) Allah . And there is a painful punishment for the disbelievers .
Indeed those who maintain rivalry against Allah and His Messenger [ blessings and peace be upon him ] will be humiliated as those before them were humiliated . And surely We have sent down clear Revelations and there is humiliating torment for the disbelievers .
On the Day when Allah will raise them up ( giving life again ) , He will then inform them of their actions . Allah has counted up ( their ) every action while they have forgotten it . And Allah is Witness over ( and Well Aware of ) everything .
( O man ! ) Do you not know that Allah knows all those things which are in the heavens and in the earth ? There is no whisper of three ( men ) anywhere but He is their fourth ( with His all - encompassing knowledge and awareness ) . Nor is there any whisper of five ( men ) but He is the sixth of them ( with His all - encompassing knowledge ) . Nor of less or more than that but He is ( always ) with them wherever they are . Then on the Day of Rising He will alert them to the actions that they used to do . Surely Allah knows everything full well .
Have you not seen those who were forbidden to whisper ? Then they started doing the same that they were forbidden to do . And they whisper about sin and revolt and disobedience to the ( Holy ) Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) and when they come to your presence they greet you with the ( unbecoming ) words with which Allah has not greeted you and say in their hearts : ( If this Messenger is truthful then ) why Allah does not punish us for what we say ? ( The punishment of ) Hell is sufficient for them . They will enter it and it is an extremely evil abode .
O Believers ! When you whisper among yourselves , whisper not sin , injustice , revolt and disobedience to the Holy Prophet ( blessings and peace be upon him ) ; but whisper piety and Godwariness and keep fearing Allah towards Whom you all will be gathered .
( Negative and destructive ) whispering is ( employed ) by Satan alone so that he may cause anguish to the believers . But in truth he ( Satan ) cannot do any harm to them ( the believers ) except by Allahs command . And the believers should trust but Allah alone .
O Believers ! When it is said to you : Open up and make room in your gatherings , then open up and make room . Allah will provide you with ample room . And when it is said : Rise up , then rise up . Allah will raise those in ranks who believe from amongst you and who are given knowledge . And Allah is Well Aware of the works that you do .
O Believers ! When you seek to submit some secret to the Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) in private , give something in charity before you submit your secret . This ( action ) is better and purer for you . But if you do not find anything ( to offer in charity ) , then Allah is Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
Are you worried about donating in charity before your submission to the Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) in secret ? So when you did not do ( that ) and Allah lifted from you probe ( i . e . relaxed this restriction ) , then establish Prayer and pay Zakat ( the Alms - due ) and obey Allah and His Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) persistently . And Allah is Well Aware of all the deeds that you do .
Have you not seen those who make friends with such a party upon whom Allah sent wrath ? They are neither of you nor of them and take false oaths while they know .
Allah has prepared for them severe punishment . Indeed it is an evil ( work ) what they are doing .
They have made their ( false ) oaths a shield . So they hinder ( others ) from the way of Allah . Consequently there is a humiliating punishment for them .
Neither their wealth nor their children will ever be able to save them from ( the punishment of ) Allah . It is they who are the inmates of Hell . They will live in it forever .
The Day when Allah will raise up all of them ( giving life a second time ) they will swear to Him ( as well ) as they swear to you . And they assume that they are on a ( right ) thing ( i . e . path ) . Beware ! They are liars .
Satan has gained mastery over them . So he has made them forget the remembrance of Allah . It is they who are Satans army . Know that indeed it is the party of Satan who are the losers .
Surely those who maintain enmity against Allah and His Messenger [ blessings and peace be upon him ] , it is they who are of the lowest of mankind .
Allah has destined : Most certainly I and My Messengers will dominate . Surely Allah is Most Strong , Almighty .
You will never find those who believe in Allah and the Day of Rising making friends with anyone who is hostile to Allah and His Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) , even though they are their fathers ( and forefathers ) or their sons ( and grandsons ) or their brothers or their near relatives . It is they in whose hearts Allah has inscribed faith and has strengthened them with His spirit ( i . e . special spiritual benefit ) . And He will admit them to the Gardens with streams flowing under them . They will live in them forever . Allah is pleased with them and they are pleased with Allah . It is they who are the Party of ( the devotees of ) Allah . Remember ! It is the Party of ( the devotees of ) Allah that attain to the goal .
Whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth ( all ) glorify Allah and He alone is Almighty , Most Wise .
He is the One Who collected the disbelievers from among the People of the Book ( i . e . the tribe of Banu Nadir ) from their houses and banished them the first time ( from Madina towards Syria ) . You did not ( even ) think that they would go away and they thought that their strong fortresses would save them from ( the seizure of ) Allah . Then ( the torment of ) Allah came upon them from where they could not ( even ) imagine . And He ( Allah ) cast terror into their hearts ( and thus ) they ruined their houses with their own hands and the believers hands . So , learn a lesson ( from it ) , O people of vision !
And had Allah not written exile for them He would have tormented them ( more severely ) in the world . And there is for them the punishment of Hell in the Hereafter ( as well ) .
It happened because they posed extreme enmity against Allah and His Messenger [ blessings and peace be upon him ] . ( Their ringleader was Kab ibn Ashraf , a notorious denigrator of the Holy Prophet [ blessings and peace be upon him ] . ) And he who opposes Allah ( and His Messenger ) then Allah is Severe in punishment .
( O Believers ! ) The palm - trees that you cut down or left standing upon their roots , ( during the siege of Banu Nadir tribe all this ) was done by Allahs Command so that He might humiliate and disgrace the disobedient .
And whatever spoils ( materials of fai - the spoils ) Allah restored to His Messenger ( [ blessings and peace be upon him ] taking out ) from them , you galloped neither horses nor camels in ( procuring ) them . Yes indeed ! Allah gives dominance and control to His Messengers over anyone He wills . And Allah has Absolute Power over everything .
And whatever ( materials of fai spoils ) Allah restored to His Messenger ( [ blessings and peace be upon him ] taking out ) from the people of ( the towns captured without war in addition to those of Quraiza , Nadir , Fadak , Khaibar and Uraina ) belong to Allah and His Messenger [ blessings and peace be upon him ] and ( the Messengers ) near relatives ( i . e . Banu Hashim and Banu Abd al - Muttalib ) and the orphans , the needy and the wayfarer ( of society at large . This distribution system is to ensure ) that ( the whole wealth ) may not circulate ( only ) among the rich of you ( but should circulate among all the classes of society ) . And whatever the Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) awards you , take that and whatever he forbids you , abstain ( from that ) and keep fearing Allah ( i . e . never scoff at the Messengers distribution and award ) . Surely Allah is Severe to punish .
( The fore - mentioned fai materials ) are ( also ) for the poor emigrants who are driven out of their houses and possessions ( and properties ) . They seek Allahs bounty and His favour and pleasure . And they help Allah and His Messenger ( [ blessings and peace be upon him ] by sacrificing their possessions and homeland ) . It is they who are true believers .
( These spoils are for those Ansar as well ) who had taken the city ( of Madina ) and the faith as their home before ( the emigrants came ) . They love those who have come to them as emigrants , and do not feel any need ( or prick of jealousy ) in their hearts pertaining to that ( wealth ) which is given to the emigrants and prefer them to themselves even though they may themselves be in dire need . And he who is saved from the miserliness of his ( ill - commanding ) self , it is they who are successful and victorious .
And those ( too ) who came after these ( emigrants and the Ansar and ) submit : O our Lord , forgive us and our brothers who have taken the lead over us in embracing faith . And let not any spite and disgust be in our hearts against the believers . O our Lord , surely You are Most Clement , Ever - Merciful .
Have you not seen the hypocrites who say to their brothers among the People of the Book who have become disbelievers : If you are driven out ( from here ) , we too will necessarily leave with you and will never obey anyone in your case , and if you are attacked , we will most certainly help you ? But Allah bears witness that they are certainly liars .
If they ( the disbelieving Jews ) are driven out ( from Madina ) , these ( hypocrites ) will never leave with them . Nor will they help them if they are put to fight . But if ( at all ) they do come to their help , they will for sure flee , turning their backs . Then they will not be helped ( from anywhere ) .
( O Muslims ! ) Indeed they have greater fear and terror of you in their hearts than Allahs . The reason is that they are the people who do not possess understanding .
They ( the Jews of Madina and the hypocrites ) will not be able to fight against you ( even ) allied , except in fortified towns or taking cover of walls . They fight hard ( but ) among themselves . You think they are united whereas their hearts are disunited . The reason is that they do not apply reason .
( Their plight ) resembles those who have tasted the evil consequences of their doings shortly before them ( i . e . the idolaters of Makka in Badr and Banu Nadir , Banu Qainuqa and Banu Quraiza of the Jews , etc . ) . And there is for them grievous punishment ( in the Hereafter as well ) .
( The example of hypocrites ) is like that of Satan when he says to man : Become a disbeliever , but when he disbelieves , he ( Satan ) says : I feel sick of you . Surely I fear Allah , the Lord of all the worlds .
Then both of them will end up in Hell and will live in it forever . And that is indeed the punishment of the wrongdoers .
O Believers ! Keep fearing Allah . And everyone should be vigilant to what he has sent forward for tomorrow ( the Day of Reckoning ) . And always fear Allah . Indeed Allah is Well Aware of what you do .
And be not like those who forgot Allah . So Allah made them forget their own souls ( that they could send forward some good for their own souls ) . It is they who are defiant .
The inmates of Hell and the people of Paradise cannot be equal . It is the people of Paradise who are successful and victorious .
Had We sent down this Quran on some mountain then , ( O listener , ) you would certainly have seen it bowed , split and crushed to pieces for fear of Allah . And We give these examples for the people so that they may ponder .
Allah is He besides Whom there is no God : the Knower of the unseen and the seen . He alone is Most Kind , Ever - Merciful .
Allah is He apart from Whom there is no God : ( the Real ) King , the Most Pure of all shortcomings , Perfectly Free from all imperfections ( and the Bestower of Peace ) , the Giver of security and protection ( and the Attester of the Messengers by means of Miracles ) , the Guardian and Watchful , the Almighty and the Lord of Honour , the Lord of Great Majesty , the Supreme Authority and the Supremely Great . Glory be to Allah , far above all that they associate with Him .
Allah is He Who is the Creator , the One Who brings into existence from nothingness ( i . e . the Inventor ) , the Bestower of Form ; ( in short , ) all Beautiful Names belong to Him alone . All that is in the heavens and the earth glorifies Him , the Lord of Honour , the Most Wise .
O Believers ! Do not make friends with My enemies and your enemies . You communicate to them information because of ( your ) friendship whereas they just deny the very Truth that has come to you . They drive out the Messenger [ blessings and peace be upon him ] and you ( from your land ) because you believe in Allah , your Sustainer . If you have set out to fight in My Way ( for the uplift of noble cause ) and seek My pleasure ( then do not have friendship with them ) . You send them secret messages of friendship while I know best what you hide and what you make known . And whoever of you does this ( misdeed ) has deviated from the straight path .
Should they overmaster you then ( you will see ) they will be your open enemies . And they will extend their hands and tongues to you with evil design and will have the earnest desire that you disbelieve ( somehow ) .
Neither your ( disbelieving and polytheist ) kindred nor your ( disbelieving and polytheist ) children will be of any good to you on the Day of Resurrection . ( On that Day Allah will ) bring about complete separation between you : ( the believers will be sent to Paradise and the disbelievers to Hell ) . And Allah observes your doings well .
Indeed in Ibrahim ( Abraham ) and his companions there is an excellent example for you ( to follow ) , when he said to his people : We are utterly weary of ( and cut off from ) you and the idols that you worship apart from Allah ; we have openly rejected you all . The enmity , hatred and malice between us and you have become evident forever until you believe in Allah , the One . But Ibrahims ( Abrahams ) saying to his ( fostering ) father : I shall certainly pray for your forgiveness , ( was just a promise made to him well before , which he fulfilled and gave him a reminder as well saying : ) I do not possess anything for you before Allah ( owing to your disbelief and idol - worship . Then he separated from his people , praying : ) O our Lord , we put our trust in You alone and we turn in repentance to You alone and ( all ) have to return to You alone .
O our Lord ! Make us not a source of trial for the disbelievers ( i . e . give them not control over us ) and forgive us . O our Lord , surely You alone are the Almighty , the Lord of Honour , the Most Wise .
Indeed there is for you an excellent example in them ( to follow ) , for him ( in particular ) who hopes ( to appear before the Presence of ) Allah and looks forward to the Last Day . But whoever turns away then Allah is Self - Sufficient and Praiseworthy .
It may be that Allah brings about friendship ( at a later stage ) between you and those of them who are now your foes . And Allah is All - Powerful and Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
Allah does not forbid you to be good to them and treat them with equity and justice who did not fight against you on ( the question of ) Din ( Religion ) , nor did they drive you out of your homes ( i . e . homeland ) . Surely Allah likes those who conduct themselves with equity and justice .
Allah forbids you only to befriend those who fought against you on ( the question of ) Din ( Religion ) and drove you out of your homes ( i . e . homeland ) and aided ( your enemies ) in expelling you . And whoever makes friends with them , it is they who are the wrongdoers .
O Believers ! When the believing women come to you as emigrants , examine them thoroughly . Allah is Well Aware of ( the reality of ) their faith . Then if you find with certitude that they are true believers , do not send them back to the disbelievers . Neither are they ( the believing women ) lawful for those disbelievers , nor are those disbelievers lawful for these ( believing women ) . And pay them ( the disbelievers ) back the money which those disbelievers spent ( on them as dower ) . And there is no sin on you if you marry them while you pay these ( women ) their dower . And , O Believers , do not hold back the disbelieving women in ( your ) wedlock and ask ( the disbelievers ) for that ( money ) which you spent ( on those women as dower ) , and they ( the disbelievers ) may also ask you for that ( money ) which they spent ( on these women as dower ) . That is the Command of Allah . And He judges between you . And Allah is All - Knowing , Most Wise .
And if any of your wives deserts you and goes over to the disbelievers , then ( when ) you become dominant in war and gain spoils , pay ( out of it ) those whose wives deserted them as much ( money ) as they paid ( to them as dower ) . And keep fearing Allah Whom you believe in .
O Prophet ! When the believing women appear in your presence to take the oath of allegiance that they will not set up anything as partner with Allah and will not steal , nor will they commit adultery or kill their children or bring false blame which they have invented between their hands and feet ( i . e . will not deceive their husbands declaring some others baby as born to her ) or disobey you in ( any ) matter pertaining to law , then accept their allegiance and seek forgiveness for them from Allah . Surely Allah is Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
O Believers ! Do not make friends with those on whom Allah has sent His wrath . Surely they have despaired of the Hereafter as the disbelievers have despaired of those in graves .
Whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth ( all ) glorify Allah . And He is the Lord of Honour and Dominance , Most Wise .
O Believers ! Why do you say what you do not do ?
It is most hateful in the sight of Allah that you should say what you do not do .
Assuredly Allah loves those who fight in the way of Allah ( so ) organized in ranks as if they were a wall cemented with molten lead ( to eliminate injustice , tyranny and terrorism and restore peace and human dignity ) .
And , ( O Beloved , recall the time ) when Musa ( Moses ) said to his people : O my People , why do you offend me while you know that I am ( a Messenger ) sent to you by Allah . So when they continued deviating , then Allah made their hearts deviate . And Allah does not guide the defiant .
( And also recall the time ) when Isa son of Maryam ( Jesus son of Mary ) said : O Children of Israel , indeed I am ( a Messenger ) sent to you by Allah , confirming the Torah , the Book which came before me , and bearing the good news of ( the pleasant arrival ) of ( the Esteemed ) Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) who will come after me , whose name is Ahmad ( now in the heavens ) . But when he ( the Last of the Messengers ) came to them with clear Signs , they said : This is open magic .
And who can be a greater wrongdoer than he who invents a lie against Allah while he is being invited towards Islam . And Allah does not guide the wrongdoers .
These ( deniers of the Truth ) desire to put out the Light of Allah by ( blowing ) with their mouths whereas Allah will take His Light to perfection , even though the disbelievers may dislike it intensely .
He is the One Who has sent His Messenger with Guidance and Din ( Religion ) of Truth so that He may make it dominate and prevail over all other religions , even though the idolaters may hate it much .
O Believers ! Shall I advise you a trade which will save you from a painful torment ?
( It is that ) you have ( perfect ) belief in Allah and His Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) and toil hard for the cause of Allah with your human and material resources . That is better for you if you know .
He will forgive your sins and will admit you into Gardens with streams flowing under them and ( will make you reside ) in excellent dwellings in the Gardens of Eden ( i . e . Gardens of Eternity ) . That is indeed a great success .
And , ( besides this favour in the Hereafter , He will grant you ) another ( worldly blessing too ) which you earnestly desire : ( that is ) help from Allah and a near victory , and , ( O Esteemed Prophet , ) give this good news to the believers . ( This came about in the form of Makkan Victory and the conquests in Persia and Rome . )
O Believers ! Be helpers of Allah as Isa son of Maryam ( Jesus son of Mary ) said to ( his ) disciples : Who are my helpers towards ( the path of ) Allah ? The disciples said : We are Allahs helpers . So a party of the Children of Israel believed and a party disbelieved . So We helped the believers against their enemies and they gained the upper hand .
( Everything ) in the heavens and in the earth glorifies Allah , ( the Real ) King , the Most Pure ( of all shortcomings and imperfections ) , the Lord of Honour , the Almighty , the Most Wise .
He is the One Who sent a ( Glorious ) Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) among the illiterate people from among themselves who recites to them His Revelations and cleanses and purifies them ( outwardly and inwardly ) and teaches them the Book and Wisdom . Indeed they were in open error before ( his most welcome arrival ) .
( And He has sent this Messenger for purification and education among ) others of them also who have not yet joined these people ( that are present now i . e . they will come after them in the time to come ) . And He is Almighty , Most Wise .
This ( arrival of the Holy Messenger and his spiritual benevolence and guidance ) are Allahs Bounty which He grants whom He likes . And Allah is Most Bountiful .
The case of those who were burdened with ( the Commandments and teachings of ) the Torah ( but ) then did not bear it ( i . e . this Messenger was mentioned in it but they disbelieved in him ) is like that of a donkey loaded with heavy books on its back . How evil is the example of those who have rejected Allahs Revelations ! And Allah does not guide the wrongdoers .
Say : O Jews , if you think that , leaving all other people , you alone are the friends of Allah ( i . e . Awliya ) , then long for death ( because His Awliya will not fear in the grave and the Hereafter ) if you are true ( in your thinking ) .
And these people will never long for it due to ( the rejection of the Messenger and disbelief ) which they have sent forward . And Allah knows the wrongdoers well .
Say : The death from which you are fleeing is bound to catch up with you . Then you will be returned to ( the Lord ) Who knows the unseen and the seen . So He will inform you of what you used to do .
O Believers ! When on Fridays the call is made for ( Jumua ) Prayer , hasten towards the remembrance of Allah ( i . e . the Jumua sermon and Prayer ) immediately and abandon purchase and sale ( i . e . business ) . That is better for you if you have knowledge .
Then after the Prayer is offered disperse in the land and ( then ) look for Allahs bounty ( i . e . sustenance ) . And remember Allah much so that you may attain to prosperity .
And when they found some business or entertainment opportunity , they rushed towards that ( due to their neediness and financial constraint ) and left you standing ( during sermon ) . Say : Whatever is with Allah is better than sport and business . And Allah is the Best of sustainers .
( O Esteemed Beloved ! ) When the hypocrites come to you they say : We bear witness that you are certainly the Messenger of Allah . And Allah knows that surely you are His Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) . But Allah bears witness that undoubtedly the hypocrites are liars .
They have made their oaths a shield . Then they hinder ( the people ) from the path of Allah . Surely that is an extremely evil ( work ) which they are doing .
The reason is that they believed ( by the word of mouth ) but remained disbelievers ( at heart ) . So their hearts have been sealed . And they do not understand ( anything ) .
( O servant ! ) When you see them , their bodies ( and height and structure ) seem attractive to you , and if they speak , you lend ear to what they say ( i . e . they will look sensible to you but the fact is that ) they are nothing but wooden bars propped up against a supporting wall . They take every loud voice ( as some suffering and misery ) befallen them . It is these ( hypocrites ) who are ( your ) enemies . So be on guard against them . May Allah ruin them ! Where are they wandering distracted !
And when it is said to them : Come so that Allahs Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) may seek forgiveness for you , these ( hypocrites ) jerk their heads aside ( insolently ) and you see them keeping away ( from your presence ) in arrogance .
It is all the same for these ( evil - fated denigrators of the Holy Prophet [ blessings and peace be upon him ] ) whether you seek for them forgiveness or do not seek for them forgiveness , Allah will never forgive them ( because they mock you and show you dislike and arrogance ) . Surely Allah does not provide guidance to the disobedient community .
( O Esteemed Beloved ! ) They are the people who say this as well ( out of malice and enmity against you ) : Do not spend on those ( destitute devotees of Allah ) who remain in the presence of the Messenger of Allah ( i . e . do not provide them financial help ) until they ( all may desert him and ) flee away ( and disperse ) . In truth , to Allah belong all the treasures of the heavens and the earth , but the hypocrites do not understand .
They say : If ( now ) we return to Madina then ( we ) the honourable ones will drive out the dishonourable ( i . e . the Muslims ) . But in fact honour belongs to Allah alone and His Messenger and the believers . However , the hypocrites do not understand ( this reality ) .
O Believers ! Let not your wealth and your children make you neglectful of the very remembrance of Allah . And whoever does so , it is they who are the losers .
And spend ( in the way of Allah ) out of ( the wealth ) which We have given you before death approaches one of you and he says : O my Lord , why did You not give me respite for a short while so that I could donate in charity and become one of the pious ?
And Allah never grants respite to anyone when his hour of death approaches . And Allah is Well Aware of the actions that you do .
Everything in the heavens and in the earth glorifies Allah . His is the entire kingdom and His is all the praise . And He is All - Powerful over everything .
He is the One Who created you . Then ( someone ) of you became a disbeliever and ( the other one ) of you became a believer and Allah sees best the actions that you do .
He is the One Who created the heavens and the earth with a rationale and purpose . And ( He is the One Who ) gave you shapes and then did up your shapes . And ( all ) have to return to Him alone .
He knows what is in the heavens and in the earth and ( also ) knows those things that you hide and that you disclose and Allah knows best ( also the secret ) matters contained in the breasts .
Has the news not reached you of those who disbelieved before you and tasted the punishment of their work ( in the world ) and there is grievous torment for them ( in the Hereafter as well ) ?
The reason is that their Messengers brought to them clear Signs but they said : Shall a human being guide us ( who is our like and from our kind ) ? So they became disbelievers and turned away ( from the Truth ) . And Allah too disregarded ( them ) and Allah is Self - Sufficient , Praiseworthy .
The disbelievers think that they will never be raised ( again ) . Say : Why not ! By my Lord ! You will surely be raised . Then you will be informed of what you did . And this is very easy for Allah ( to do ) .
So believe in Allah and His Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) and that Light which We have sent down . And Allah is Well Aware of the deeds that you do .
The Day when He will gather you on the Day of Assembly ( in the vast expanse for Great Gathering ) , that will be the Day of Manifestation of Loss and Defeat . And he who believes in Allah and does pious deeds , Allah will remove his sins from his ( record of deeds ) and will admit him to the Gardens with streams flowing under them . They will live in them forever . This is a great success .
And those who disbelieve and reject Our Revelations , it is they who are the inmates of Hell , its permanent residents . And what an evil abode that is !
No suffering afflicts ( anyone ) except by the Command of Allah . And he who believes in Allah , He guides his heart and Allah knows best everything .
And obey Allah and obey the Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) . Then if you turn away ( remember that ) the responsibility of Our Messenger is only to deliver ( the injunctions ) clearly .
Allah ( alone ) is ( God ) . There is no God but He . And the believers should put their trust in Allah alone .
O Believers ! Surely among your wives and your children there are some who are your enemies . So , beware of them ! And if you overlook it and forbear and forgive , Allah is indeed Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
Your riches and your children are merely a trial . And there is a mighty reward in the Presence of Allah .
So fear Allah as much as you are able to . And listen to ( His Commands ) and obey and spend ( in His way ) . That will be better for you . And whoever is saved from the miserliness of his ( ill - commanding ) self , so it is they who will attain to prosperity .
If you lend a good loan to Allah ( with sincerity and righteous intention ) , He will increase it manifold for you and will forgive you . And Allah is Most Appreciative , Most Forbearing .
The Knower of the unseen and the seen , the Lord of Honour and Almighty and Most Wise .
O Prophet ! ( Say to the Muslims : ) When you seek to divorce your women , divorce them during their period of purity and count their prescribed period . And keep fearing Allah , Who is your Lord . And do not drive them out of their homes nor should they leave unless they commit open indecency . And these are Allahs ( fixed ) limits . And whoever transgresses Allahs limits has surely wronged his own soul . ( O man , ) you do not know that perhaps Allah may develop a new situation ( to turn you back to her after divorce ) .
Then when they reach closer to ( the end of ) their appointed term , retain them with kindness or separate from them with kindness . And take two just persons from among you as witnesses and establish testimony for the sake of Allah . This is an advice for him alone who believes in Allah and the Last Day . And whoever fears Allah He makes a way out for him ( from pain and grief of this world and the Hereafter ) .
And He gives him sustenance from a source which he can never think of . And whoever puts his trust in Allah then He ( Allah ) is Sufficient for him . Surely Allah accomplishes His work entirely . He has certainly appointed a measure for everything .
And those of your women who have no hope of menstruation , if you doubt ( as to what will be their prescribed period ) , then their prescribed period is three months . And for those women who have not yet menstruated ( their prescribed period is also the same ) . As for the pregnant women , their term is till the birth of the child . And whoever fears Allah , He makes his matter easy for him .
This is the Command of Allah which He has sent down to you . And whoever fears Allah He removes his minor sins from his ( record of deeds ) and enhances for him reward .
Keep the ( divorced ) women where you live according to your means . And do not harm them so as to make ( the place of living ) intolerable for them . And if they are pregnant , keep spending on them till they give birth to the child . Then if they suckle ( the child ) for your sake , pay them their recompense . And consult each other ( as usual ) for good . But if you experience difficulty mutually ( then some ) other woman may suckle the child .
The affluent should spend ( according to ) his means . And whoever is provided sustenance scarcely , let him spend ( on her maintenance ) out of the provision which Allah has given him . Allah does not burden anyone beyond what He has given him . Allah will soon bring about ease after hardship .
And how many towns there were ( the inhabitants of ) which disobeyed and revolted against the command of their Lord and His Messengers ! So We called them to account in the shape of fierce accountability and seized them with such a severe torment as was never seen or even heard of .
So they tasted the evil consequence of their doings and their affair ended up in total loss .
Allah has prepared for them severe torment ( in the Hereafter too ) . So keep fearing Allah , O men of reason , you who have believed . No doubt it is you towards whom Allah has sent down the Reminder ( the Quran ) .
And ( has sent also ) the Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) who recites to you clear Verses so that he may take those who have believed and do pious deeds from darkness to light . And he who believes in Allah and does pious deeds , He will admit him to the Gardens with streams flowing under them . They will live in them forever . Indeed Allah has ( prepared ) for him excellent sustenance .
Allah ( alone ) has created seven heavens and ( brought about seven strata layer upon layer also while creating ) the earth like them . And the Command ( phenomenon of coordination in the system of nature ) continues to operate among them so that you may know that Allah has Absolute Power over everything , and that Allah has encompassed everything with His Knowledge ( i . e . when scientific explorations will culminate , you will then perceive the Glory of Allahs Power and His All - Encompassing Knowledge as to how He has described the realities of His Creation centuries before ) .
O ( Esteemed ) Prophet ! Why do you forbid yourself ( taking honey ) which Allah has made for you lawful ? ( How well ) you seek to please your wives ! And Allah is Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
( O Believers ! ) Indeed Allah has prescribed for you how to dissolve your oaths ( by atonement ) . And Allah is your Helper and Protector . And He is All - Knowing , Most Wise .
And when the Holy Prophet [ blessings and peace be upon him ] secretly disclosed a matter to one of his wives but when she mentioned it and Allah made it known to the Prophet ( blessings and peace be upon him ) , then the Prophet reminded her of some part of it and overlooked ( to inform ) the rest of it . Then when the Prophet ( blessings and peace be upon him ) informed her of it ( that she had disclosed that secret ) , she said : Who has told you of that ? The Prophet said : All - Knowing , All - Aware ( Lord ) has told me .
If you both turn to Allah in repentance ( that is better for you ) because the hearts of both of you have inclined ( towards the same ) but if you help one another in this matter ( that may annoy the Holy Prophet ) . So surely Allah is the One Who is his Friend and Helper and Jibril [ Gabriel ] and the most pious believers and after them ( all ) angels too are ( his ) helpers .
If he divorces you then it may well be that your Lord will give him in your place better wives than yourselves ( who ) will be obedient , true believers , submissive , penitent , worshippers , given to fasting , ( some ) formerly married and ( some ) virgins .
O Believers ! Safeguard yourselves and your families against a Fire whose fuel is men and stones . Strong and stern angels have been appointed over it who do not disobey Allah whatever command He gives them to execute . And they accomplish only that assignment which they are commanded to do .
O disbelievers ! Do not make any excuse today . You will only be paid the reward of what you have been doing .
O Believers ! Turn towards Allahs Presence in perfect and most sincere repentance . Your Lord will certainly remove your sins from you and admit you to the Gardens with streams flowing under them . On the Day when Allah will not slight ( His ) Prophet ( blessings and peace be upon him ) and those believers who are in his companionship ( visibly or invisibly ) , their light will be moving fast ( brightening ) ahead of them and on their right hand . They will be submitting : O our Lord , perfect our light for us and forgive us . Surely You have Absolute Power over everything .
O ( Esteemed ) Prophet ! Struggle hard against the disbelievers and the hypocrites and treat them strictly . And their abode is Hell . And what an evil abode that is !
Allah has described for disbelievers the example of Nuhs ( Noahs ) wife ( Wahila ) and Luts ( Lots ) wife ( Waila ) . They were married to two most pious of Our servants . But both of them betrayed them . So they could not help them before ( the torment of ) Allah and it was said to them : Both of you ( women ) enter Hell along with all who enter it .
And Allah has given for the believers the example of Pharaohs wife ( Asiya daughter of Mazahim ) when she submitted : O my Lord , build a house for me in Paradise in Your Presence and deliver me from Pharaoh and his ( evil ) conduct and also rescue me from the wrongdoing people .
And ( the second example is given of ) Maryam ( Mary ) , the daughter of Imran , who guarded well her chastity and purity . And We breathed Our Spirit into the sternal opening of ( her ) shirt . And she confirmed the Commandments of her Lord and the ( revealed ) Books and she was of the obedient .
Blessed is He in Whose ( Mighty ) Hand is the Kingdom ( of all the worlds ) . And He enjoys Perfect Command over everything .
He Who has created death and life ( so that ) He may test you as to which of you is best in conduct . And He is Almighty , Most Forgiving .
He Who has created seven ( or numerous ) heavenly spheres corresponding to one another ( layer upon layer ) . You will not find any irregularity and disproportion in the system of the creation of the Most Kind ( Lord ) . So have a ( meditative and thoughtful ) look around : do you find in this ( Creation ) any incongruity or disharmony ( i . e . degeneration or falling apart ) ?
Look around time and again with ( an inquisitive ) vision ( from different angles and with scientific methods . Every time ) your sight will return to you fatigued and frustrated ( in finding any shortcoming or imperfection ) .
And surely We have adorned the lowest heaven of the universe with lights ( in the form of stars , planets , other asteroids and meteoroids ) . And We have also made ( some of them ) the means of pelting away ( i . e . eliminating the negative effects of ) satans ( i . e . rebellious forces ) . And We have prepared for these ( satans ) a torment of Blazing Fire .
And for those who have denied their Lord is the torment of Hell . And what an evil abode it is !
When they will be flung into it they will hear its horrifying roar . And that ( Fire ) will be boiling ( with rage ) .
As if it is about to burst into pieces with intense wrath . When a group will be cast into it , its guards will ask them : Did no Warner come to you ?
They will say : Yes indeed ! A Warner did come to us but we rejected him and said : Allah has not sent down anything . You are just in great error .
And they will say : Had we listened to or understood ( the Truth ) , we would not have been ( put ) among the inmates of Hell ( today ) .
Then they will confess their sin . So remoteness for the inmates of Hell ( from Allahs Mercy ) is ( destined ) .
Surely those who fear their Lord unseen , for them is forgiveness and great reward .
And whether you speak in secret or aloud , certainly He knows best ( even ) the things ( hidden ) in the hearts .
Does He , Who has created , not know ? In truth He is the One Who can see the essence and is Well Aware ( of everything ) .
He is the One Who has made the earth soft and subservient to you . So walk about through its tracks and eat of the sustenance ( given ) by Him and towards Him alone is the return , rising ( after death ) .
Have you gone fearless of ( the Lord of ) the heaven that He may sink you into the earth when it suddenly shakes ?
Have you gone fearless of ( the Lord of ) the heaven that He may send against you a stone - pelting wind ? Then soon will you come to know how My Warning is !
And surely those before them ( also ) denied . But how ( awful did prove ) My denial !
Have they not seen the birds above them spreading out their wings and ( sometimes ) folding them ? Nothing can hold them ( from falling down in the air ) except ( the law made by ) the Most Kind ( Lord ) . Surely He sees everything best .
Well , is there anyone that can muster an army to help you against the Most Kind Lord ? The disbelievers are merely ( snared ) in deception .
Well , is there anyone that can provide you sustenance if ( Allah ) holds back His sustenance ( from you ) ? In fact they are adamantly fixed in rebellion and hatred ( for Truth )
Is he who walks in prone position more rightly guided or he who walks upright on a straight path ?
Say : ( Allah ) is He Who created you and provided you with ears and eyes and hearts . Yet you give thanks but little .
Say : He is the One Who has spread you in the earth and you will be gathered towards Him ( on the Day of Assembly ) .
And they say : When will this promise ( of the Day of Resurrection ) be fulfilled if you are truthful ?
Say : The knowledge ( of that Hour ) is with Allah alone and I am just a clear Warner . ( If the time is disclosed there will be no fear any more ) .
Then when they will see that ( Day ) near , the faces of the disbelievers will be deformed and turned black and it will be said ( to them ) : This is ( the promise ) which you asked for ( to come to pass in haste ) .
Say : Well , give your view : if Allah causes me death ( as you desire ) and ( also ) to my companions , or shows Mercy to us ( i . e . defers our death ) , then ( in both these cases ) who will shelter the disbelievers from the painful torment ?
Say : He alone is the Most Kind ( Lord ) in Whom we believe and in Whom we trust . So you will soon know who is in open error .
Say : If your water sinks far deep into the earth ( i . e . dries up ) then who will bring you flowing water ( on earth ) ?
Nun . ( Only Allah and the Messenger [ blessings and peace be upon him ] know the real meaning . ) By the pen and by that ( subject ) which ( the angels ) write down !
( O Esteemed Beloved ! ) By the Grace of your Lord you are not ( at all ) insane .
And assuredly for you there is a reward that will never end .
And assuredly you are placed high on the Most Glorious and Exalted ( seat of ) Character ( i . e . adorned with the Quranic morality and endowed with the character traits of Allah ) .
Soon you will see and they ( too ) will see .
As to which of you is mad .
Surely your Lord knows him best who has strayed from the straight path and ( also ) knows best those who are rightly guided .
So do not agree with what the beliers say .
They wish that you should become ( needlessly ) flexible ( in the matter of Din [ Religion ] ) . Then they too would show flexibility .
And do not agree with any vile , most mean swearer of oaths .
( The one who is ) a slanderer , fault - finder , mischief - monger ( and ) backbiting the people to rouse strife .
( The one who ) hinders pious works very much and is a miser , rebellious transgressor ( and ) toughened sinner .
( The one who is ) rude , unmannerly , crooked and moreover of doubtful birth .
So ( do not pay any heed to him ) because he is wealthy and has children .
When Our Verses are recited to him he says : These are fictitious stories of the bygone people .
Now We will brand him on the snout .
Surely We will try them ( the inhabitants of Makka in the same way ) as We tried ( in Yemen ) the owners of the garden when they swore that they would surely pluck its fruit the next morning .
And they did not make any exception ( saying if Allah wills or for the share of the orphans ) .
So a whirl ( of disaster ) from your Lord went round ( that garden during the night ) while they were asleep .
So , that ( waving fruit - laden garden ) became a harvested field in the morning .
Then as the day dawned they started calling out one another .
Leave early for your tilth if you want to pick the fruit .
So they set off whispering , to one another .
Do not let any pauper come near you in the garden today .
And early in the morning they left , ( feeling ) quite competent to execute their plan ( of getting the yield and depriving the poor of their share ) .
Then when they saw that ( ruined garden ) , they said : We must have lost our way ; ( this is not our garden ) .
( But when they saw it cautiously , they cried : Oh no ! ) We have been deprived indeed .
One of them wise and inclined to the balanced judgment said : Did I not say to you : why do you not glorify and remember Allah ?
( Then ) they said : Our Lord is Holy . Surely it is we who were the wrongdoers .
So , blaming and maligning , they turned to one another .
They said : Woe to us ! No doubt it is we who were disobedient and rebellious .
We hope that our Lord may give us something better than this in exchange . Verily we turn to our Lord .
Such is the punishment . And truly the torment of the Hereafter is far greater ( than this ) . Would that they only knew !
Surely for the Godfearing there are Gardens of Bliss with their Lord .
Shall We ( deprive ) the obedient like the disobedient ?
What is the matter with you ? How do you make a judgment ?
Do you have any Book with you in which you read ( this ) .
That it contains all that you like ?
Or have you any ( such ) firm covenants from Us which will subsist till the Day of Resurrection ( by means of which We are bound ) that you will be provided with whatever you shall decide ( for yourselves ) ?
Ask them which of them will vouch for such ( a baseless assertion ) !
Or do they have any partners ( as well ) ? Then they should bring their partners if they are truthful .
The Day when the shin ( i . e . the terrifying fierceness of the Hour of Rising ) will be laid bare , and ( the disobedient ) people will be called to prostrate themselves but they will not be able to do so ( i . e . to prostrate themselves ) .
Their eyes will be cast down ( with terror and shame ) and disgrace will be spreading over them whereas they were called to prostrate themselves ( in the world also ) when they were healthy ( but they , even then , refused to fall prostrate ) .
So , ( O Esteemed Beloved , ) leave Me ( to exact revenge ) from the one who rejects this Revelation . Now We shall take them ( towards disaster ) so gradually that they will not perceive it .
And I am giving them respite . Surely My strategy is unbeatable .
Do you ask them for any reward ( for preaching the faith in Messengership ) that they are weighed down with ( the burden of ) paying the recompense ?
Do they have the knowledge of the unseen that they write down ( their judgments on the basis of that ) ?
So be steadfast in waiting for the Command of your Lord and do not ( take it to your heart ) like ( Yunus [ Jonah ] , the Messenger with ) Fish episode , when he cried out ( to Allah ) in a state pent - up with rage and grief ( against his community ) .
Had the Mercy and Blessing of his Lord not helped him , he would certainly have been thrown in the barren field , blamed . ( But Allah saved him from that . )
Then his Lord exalted him and ( placed him ) among the perfectly pious , ( blessing him with His exceptional nearness ) .
And indeed when the disbelievers listen to the Quran it seems as if they wish to damage you with their ( jealously evil ) looks and say : He is insane .
And it ( the Quran ) is direction and guidance for all the worlds .
The surely Inevitable Hour !
What is the surely Inevitable Hour ?
And what has made you alert what ( calamity ) surely is the Inevitable Hour ?
Thamud and Ad rejected the ( calamity of a ) Shattering Gravitational Collision ( of all the existent cosmic bodies ) .
So , as for the people of Thamud , they were destroyed by the extremely violent Deafening Blast .
And as for the people of Ad , they ( too ) were destroyed by a violently cold roaring gale .
Allah made that ( gale ) seize them for consecutive seven nights and eight days . So , you could see them lying dead ( during that time as if ) they were hollow roots of the uprooted palm trees .
So do you see any of them surviving ?
And Pharaoh and those before him and ( the dwellers of ) the overthrown towns ( of the community of Lut [ Lot ] ) committed grave sins .
So they ( also ) disobeyed the Messenger of their Lord . And Allah seized them with a mighty seizure .
Indeed when water ( of the Deluge ) overflowed the limit , We carried you in the floating Ark .
So that We make this ( episode a reminding ) lesson of warning for you and that the retentive ears may retain it .
Then when the Trumpet will be blown once .
And the earth and mountains will be removed ( from their places ) , they will then be crushed to sand particles in a single crash .
Then that will be the Hour when the surely Inevitable ( calamity ) will occur .
And ( all ) the heavenly bodies will split apart and this universe will come to comprise ( black ) holes ( by means of a force which coordinates and keeps the system going ) . *
And the angels will be standing on its edges and above them that Day eight ( angels or parties of angels ) will be carrying the Throne of your Lord .
That Day you will be made to appear ( for reckoning ) . Nothing of your secrets will remain hidden .
So the one who will be given his record in the right hand will say ( pleased ) : Come and read my record .
I firmly believed that I would find my account ( easy ) .
So he will live a pleasant life .
In an elevated lofty Paradise .
The clusters of its fruits hanging low ( due to abundance ) .
( It will be said to them : ) Eat and drink rejoicing , in recompense of ( your deeds ) that you had sent forward during the days of your past ( life ) .
And as for him who will be given his Record in his left hand will say : Would that I had not been given my Record !
And would that I had not known about my account !
Alas ! Would that ( death ) had settled my affair once for all !
Today my wealth has not been able to keep ( the torment ) away from me even a little .
My power and domain have ( also ) gone from me .
( It will be commanded : ) Seize him and put him in neck - fetter .
Then cast him into Hell .
Then bind him tightly in a seventy yard long chain .
Verily he did not believe in Allah , the Lord of Majesty .
Nor did he urge the feeding of the poor .
So today he does not have any warm friend .
Nor has he anything to eat except filthy pus .
That no one will eat except the sinners .
So I swear by the things that you see .
And by those things that you do not see .
Assuredly this ( Quran ) is the ( God - sent ) Commandment of the Exalted and Glorious Messenger ( [ blessings and peace be upon him ] which he expounds as a Messenger and as a Vicegerent ) .
And it is not the poetry of a poet ( composed with literary expertise ) . You have but little faith .
Nor it is the word of a fortune - teller ( designed by skilful guesswork ) . You take but little advice .
( This ) is sent down by the Lord of all the worlds .
And had he ascribed to Us even a ( single ) fabricated thing .
We would have seized him with full force and might .
Then certainly We would have cut his life artery .
Then no one of you could have held ( Us ) back from it .
So no doubt this ( Quran ) is direction and guidance for the Godfearing .
And surely We know that some of you are the beliers ( of this open Truth ) .
And surely this is ( a cause of ) bitter regret for the disbelievers .
And undeniably it is the Truth of Absolute Certitude .
So , ( O Esteemed Beloved , ) glorify your Lord , Most Magnificent , with persistence .
A questioner asked for the torment which is sure to come about .
Upon the disbelievers , which no one can repel .
( That will befall ) from Allah , Who is the Lord of the Ascending Steps to Heaven ( and of the higher ranks and grades of spiritual hierarchy ) .
The angels and ar - Ruh al - Amin ( the Spirit ) rise towards His ( Throne ) in a day which measures fifty thousand years ( according to the worldly scale ) .
So , ( O Beloved , ) observe patience ( on the assertions of the disbelievers ) without regrets .
Surely they imagine that ( Day ) to be far off .
But We see it very near .
On that Day the sky will become like molten copper .
And the mountains like ( flakes of ) coloured wool .
And no friend will enquire after his friend .
( Though ) they will be shown ( to one another ) . The sinner would desire to ransom himself from the torment of that Day by his children .
And ( by giving ) his wife and his brother .
And ( all ) his family who used to provide him shelter .
And all the people on earth ( as recompense for himself ) , so that this ( atonement ) may save him from ( Allahs torment ) .
But no ! By no means ! Surely that is a Flaming Fire .
Stripping off the skin of all the limbs and the scalp .
It is calling him who turned his back ( on the Truth ) and turned away .
And ( he who ) accumulated wealth and then held it ( from distribution ) .
Surely man has been created impatient and greedy .
He gets upset and worried when some hardship ( or financial loss ) afflicts him .
But becomes miserly when he receives good fortune ( or affluence ) .
Except for those who offer Prayer .
And are constant in their Prayer .
And those ( who are committed to sacrifice and ) in whose wealth there is a fixed share .
Of one who begs and of one who is needy but does not beg .
And those who affirm the Day of Requital .
And those who fear the torment of their Lord .
Surely the torment of their Lord is not a thing which should not be feared .
And those who safeguard their private parts .
Except from their wives or the female slaves they possess . So ( in this ) there is no blame on them .
But he who looks for more than that , then it is they who transgress the limits .
And those who safeguard their trusts and promises .
And those who stand firm on their testimonies .
And those who safeguard their Prayers .
It is they who will enjoy great honour and respect in the Gardens .
So what is the matter with the disbelievers that they are coming towards you running .
From the right as well as the left , in groups ?
Does everyone of them hope that he may be admitted to the Garden of Bliss ( without faith and deeds ) ?
Certainly not ! Surely We have created them from a substance which they ( also ) know .
So I swear by the Lord of the easts and the wests that surely We have Absolute Power .
To replace them with people better than them and We are not at all incapable ( of doing it ) .
So leave them occupied with their absurd talk and pastime until they meet that Day of theirs which they have been promised .
The Day when they will come forth from their graves in haste as if they are running towards the temples of their idols .
( Their plight ) will be that their eyes will be cast down ( with shame and fear ) and disgrace enveloping them . It is this Day which they were promised .
Surely We sent Nuh ( Noah ) to his people : Warn your people before a painful torment comes upon them .
He said : O my people ! Indeed I am a clear Warner to you .
That you must worship Allah and fear Him and obey me .
He will forgive your sins and will give you respite till an appointed term . Surely when ( the appointed ) time of Allah comes then respite is not given if only you knew .
Nuh ( Noah ) submitted : O my Lord ! Indeed I kept calling my people night and day .
But my calling did no good except making them flee away .
And every time I called them ( towards faith ) so that You forgive them , they only thrust their fingers into their ears and wrapped their clothes over themselves and stuck obstinately ( to disbelief ) and behaved most arrogantly .
Then I called them aloud .
Then I advised them publicly and privately and secretly ( as well ) .
Then I said : Seek forgiveness from your Lord . Surely He is Most Forgiving .
He will send down on you torrents of rain .
And will help you with wealth and sons and will grow for you gardens and will make streams flow for you .
What is the matter with you that you do not have faith in or the gnosis of Allahs Majesty .
Whereas He has created you through diverse conditions ?
Have you not seen how Allah has created seven ( or many ) heavenly spheres corresponding to one another ( layer upon layer ) ?
And He brightened in them the moon and made the sun a radiant lamp ( i . e . the source of light and heat ) .
And Allah has caused you to grow like vegetation from the earth .
Then He will return you into the same ( earth ) and will then bring you forth ( from the same again ) .
And Allah has made the earth a vast expanse for you .
So that you may move around through its broad ways .
Nuh ( Noah ) submitted : O my Lord ! They have disobeyed me and kept following that ( class of the rebellious rich ) whose wealth and children have not increased for them anything but loss .
And they kept perpetrating huge frauds ( to keep the common man in error ) .
And they kept saying : Do not turn away from your gods and never abandon ( the idols named as ) Wadd , Suwa , Yaghuth , Yauq and Nasr ( as well ) .
And truly they have misled many people . So , ( O my Lord , ) do not increase these wrongdoers ( in anything ) except misguidance .
( In the end ) they were drowned due to their sins and then flung into the Fire . So they could not find any helper for themselves against Allah .
And Nuh ( Noah ) submitted : O my Lord ! Do not leave even a single disbeliever living on earth .
Surely if You leave them ( alive ) they will keep leading your servants astray and will beget none but the most wicked and extremely disbelieving children .
O my Lord ! Forgive me and my parents and everyone who enters my home as a believer and ( all ) the believing men and the believing women and do not increase anything for the wrongdoers except destruction .
Say : It has been revealed to me that a party of the jinn listened to ( my recitation ) carefully and then ( went back to their people and ) said : Surely we have heard a wonderful Quran .
It shows the path of guidance . So we have believed in it and will never set up any partner with our Lord .
And that exalted High is the Glory of our Lord . He has taken to Himself neither any wife nor children .
And that only a fool from among us used to utter things about Allah far from the Truth , crossing bounds .
And that we thought that man and jinn would never tell a lie against Allah .
And that some of the men used to take shelter with some of the jinn . So they increased defiance among the jinn .
And , ( O party of jinn , ) those men also thought just as you thought that Allah would never raise up anyone ( after death ) .
And that we touched the heavens and found them filled with high - alert guards and stars shining and burning ( like brands ) .
And that we used to sit on certain seats ( in the heaven previously , to listen to the news ) , but if someone now seeks to listen then he will find a flame of fire ( waiting ) for him in ambush .
And that we do not know whether some evil has been intended ( by our restriction ) in respect of those people who are in the earth or their Lord intends some good for them .
And that among us are some who are pious and there are also some ( evil ) exceptions among us . We were ( following ) different ways .
And we have ascertained that we can by no means come in the way of Allah ( while living ) in the earth , nor can we thwart Him by escaping ( from the earth ) .
And that when we listened to ( the Book of ) Guidance , we believed in it . Then he who believes in his Lord fears neither loss nor injustice .
And that ( some ) of us are obedient and ( some ) of us are wrongdoers as well . So he who becomes obedient , it is they who seek righteousness .
And as for the wrongdoers , they will be the fuel of Hell .
And this ( Revelation has also come to me ) that if they had remained firm on the right path ( the path of Truth , the path of the remembrance of Allah ) , then We would have provided them with abundant water .
So that We put them to trial by this blessing . And whoever turns away from the remembrance of his Lord , He will cause him to enter a severe torment .
And that mosques are ( specified ) for Allah alone . So never worship anyone else besides Allah .
And that when the servant of Allah ( Muhammad [ blessings and peace be upon him ] ) stood up to worship Him they thronged around him ( to listen to his recitation ) .
Say : I worship only my Lord and do not associate any partner with Him .
Say : I do not possess any power to do you harm ( make you disbelieve ) or to do you good ( i . e . make you believe . So Allah is the real Lord . I am a mediator and means ) .
Say : Neither can anyone shelter me from a torment ( against the command ) of Allah , nor can I ever find refuge apart from Him alone .
But ( my responsibility is ) to communicate from Allah His Commands and Messages . And whoever disobeys Allah and His Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) , surely there is for him the Fire of Hell in which they will live forever .
Until when they will see that torment which is being promised to them , ( then ) they will come to know who is weaker in helpers and fewer in numbers .
Say : I do not know whether that ( Day of Rising ) which is being promised to you is near or my Lord has appointed a longer term for that .
( He is ) the Knower of the unseen . So He does not inform any ( common man ) of His unseen .
Except for His Messengers with whom He is well - pleased ( and reveals to them alone the Unseen because that is an exclusive trait of Prophethood and a Messengers miracle as well ) . So indeed He appoints protectors at both front and rear of him ( the Messenger , for the security of the knowledge of the Unseen ) .
So that Allah may bring ( this thing ) to light that surely they ( the Messengers ) have communicated the Messages of their Lord and Allah has ( already ) encompassed what they have ( of Allahs Injunctions and the knowledge of the Unseen ) and He has kept count of everything .
O mantled ( Beloved ! )
Rise and stand ( in Prayer ) at night but ( for ) a short while .
Half the night or decrease it a little .
Or increase it a little more to it . And recite the Quran with most pleasant pauses .
Soon We shall send down to you a burdensome command .
No doubt rising at night strictly subdues ( the ill - commanding self ) and makes the tongue deliver straight and clear speech ( with the concentration of head and heart ) .
Of course there are many commitments for you during the day .
And continue remembering the Name of your Lord , devoted completely to Him alone ( in your heart and soul ) , broken away from everyone else .
He is the Lord of the east and the west . There is no God but He . So take Him alone as ( your ) Guardian .
And observe patience with what the ( disbelievers ) utter and turn aside from them in a fine manner .
And leave Me ( to deal ) with the denying rich money - mongers ( to take revenge ) . And give them a little respite ( so that their evil deeds may cross the limit ) .
Surely We have heavy shackles and the Blazing Fire ( of Hell ) .
And food that chokes the throat and most painful torment .
The Day when the earth and the mountains shall shake violently and mountains will turn into heaps of flying away sand .
Surely We have sent towards you a Messenger ( blessings and peace be upon him ) , who bears witness to you ( seeing thoroughly your states of being ) , as We sent a Messenger towards Pharaoh .
So Pharaoh disobeyed that Messenger and We seized him with a devastating seizure .
If you continue disbelieving , then how will you save yourselves from ( the torment of ) that Day which will turn the children old .
( The day ) by whose severity the heaven will be split apart ? His promise is bound to be fulfilled .
Verily this ( Quran ) is an admonition . So let him who desires adopt the way to reach his Lord .
Surely your Lord knows that you stand ( for Prayer sometimes ) about two - thirds of the night and ( sometimes ) half the night and ( sometimes ) a third of the night , and ( also ) a party of those who are with you ( join in standing up for Prayer ) .
And Allah is the One Who keeps the true measure ( of increasing or decreasing ) the night and the day .
He knows that you just do not have the power to encompass it so He granted you forgiveness ( by reducing the toil ) .
So recite the Quran as much as is easy for you . He knows that ( some of ) you will be ill and ( some ) others will be travelling in the land to look for Allahs bounty and ( still some ) others will be fighting in the way of Allah .
So recite as much as is easy for you . And establish Prayer and pay Zakat ( the Alms - due ) and lend Allah a goodly loan .
And whatever good you will send forward for yourselves , you will find it in the Presence of Allah much better and in reward still greater .
And keep seeking forgiveness from Allah . Allah is Most Forgiving , Ever - Merciful .
O enwrapped ( Beloved ! )
Rise and give warning ( to the people ) .
And glorify the Greatnesss ( and Majesty ) of your Lord .
And ( always ) keep your ( visible and spiritual ) attire purified and cleansed ( as before ) .
And keep away from the idols ( and sins as usual ) .
And do not do favour ( to anyone with the purpose of ) seeking more from him .
And observe patience for the sake of your Lord .
Then when the Trumpet will be blown ( a second time ) .
So that Day ( i . e . the Day of Resurrection ) will be an extremely hard day .
Not at all easy for the disbelievers .
Leave Me ( to take the revenge ) on him whom I have created lonely .
And I provided him wealth in abundance .
And ( gave ) him sons remaining present ( before him ) .
And granted him affluence ( in sources of luxury ) .
Yet he desires that I should give him more .
No way ! He has certainly been inimical to Our Revelations .
Soon I will afflict him with ( the punishment of ) a severe toil .
Surely he reflected and devised a scheme ( in his heart ) .
Let ( Allahs ) woe ( curse ) be to him ! How he schemed ?
Let again ( Allahs ) woe ( curse ) be to him ! How he schemed ?
Then he pondered ( over his scheme again ) .
Then he frowned and twisted his face .
Then he turned back ( from the Truth ) and showed arrogance .
Then he said : This ( Quran ) is nothing but magic which is being transmitted from the past ( magicians ) .
This ( Quran ) is nothing ( else ) but the words of a human being .
I will soon cast him into Hell .
And who has told you what Saqar ( the Fire of Hell ) is ?
That ( is the fire which ) does not spare , nor does leave out .
( That ) scorches the skin and blackens it .
There are nineteen ( angels appointed as guards ) over it .
And We have appointed only angels as guards of Hell .
And We have fixed their number only as a trial for the disbelievers so that the People of the Book may believe with certitude ( that the Quran and the Prophethood of Muhammad [ blessings and peace be upon be upon him ] is a Truth because the same number was given in their Scriptures as well ) ,
and that the faith of the believers may further be strengthened ( with this confirmation ) ,
and that the people of the Book and the believers may not doubt ( its trueness ) ,
and that those having disease ( of hypocrisy ) in their hearts and the disbelievers may say : What does Allah intend by this example ( of number ) ?
In this way Allah holds astray whom He wills and guides aright whom He wills ( with the same stroke ) .
And no one knows the armies of your Lord except Him . And this ( description of Hell is nothing else ) but an admonition to mankind .
Yes ! By the moon ( whose increase , decrease and disappearance is evidence ) .
And by the night when it backs away to depart .
And by the morning when it brightens .
Surely this ( Hell ) is one of the greatest calamities .
It is a warning to mankind .
For any of you who seeks to advance forward ( in piety ) or who lags behind ( trapped in evil ) .
Everyone is held in pledge for ( the deeds ) that he has earned .
Except for those on the Right Side .
( They ) will be in Gardens and will be asking one another .
About the evildoers .
( And they will say : ) What has brought you into Hell ?
They will say : We were not of those who used to offer Prayers .
Nor did we feed the poor .
And we indulged in vain activities with those who had cast themselves into vain activities .
And we rejected the Day of Reward and Punishment .
Until that ( death ) came upon us which was certain to come .
So ( now ) intercession of the intercessors will not be of any benefit to them .
Then what is the matter with these ( disbelievers that even then ) they turn away from the Reminder .
As if they were startled ( wild ) donkeys .
Fleeing away from a lion ?
In fact everyone of them desires that he should be given ( directly ) open scrolls of ( heavenly ) Scriptures .
That is not possible at all . Rather ( the fact is that ) they fear not the Last Day .
There is no doubt that this ( Quran ) is a Reminder .
So whoever wills may remember it .
And they will not remember ( it ) unless Allah so wills . He is the One to Whom fearing ( and righteousness ) is due , and He alone is the Lord of Forgiveness .
I swear by the Day of Resurrection .
And I swear by the blaming self , reproaching ( itself for evil deeds ) .
Does man think We will not at all collect his bones ( which will decompose into dust particles after his death ) ?
Yes , of course ! We have also the power to restore and set right even his finger joints ( phalanges ) and finger tips .
Yet man still wants to continue committing sins also ( in the life to come ) .
He asks ( scornfully ) : When is the Day of Resurrection ?
But when the eyes will be dazzled .
And the moon will be eclipsed .
And the sun and the moon will be fused ( darkened ) together .
On that Day will man cry out : Where to flee away ?
No indeed ! There is no place of refuge .
The place of refuge and repose that Day will be with your Lord alone .
That Day man will be informed of those ( deeds ) which he sent forward and those ( repercussions ) which he left behind ( after his death ) .
In truth , man will ( himself ) be aware of ( the affairs of ) his self .
Even though he will offer all his excuses .
( O Beloved ! ) Do not move your tongue in a hurry ( to learn the Quran by heart when it is revealed to you ) .
Assuredly upon Us rests its collection and preservation ( in your breast ) and its recitation ( by your tongue ) .
So when We complete its recitation ( by the tongue of Jibril [ Gabriel ] ) then follow that recitation .
Then surely upon Us is the clear exposition ( of its implications ) .
The truth is , ( O disbelievers , ) that you love ( the world ) which you can readily gain .
And you have left aside the Hereafter .
Many faces will be fresh and in full bloom that Day .
Viewing ( the enchanting radiance and beauty of ) their Lord ( unveiled ) .
And many faces will be deformed ( depressed and dark ) that Day .
Thinking that they will be subjected to such a harsh treatment which will break their backbones .
No indeed ! When the soul reaches the throat .
And it is said : Who can ( now ) treat him with magic ( to cure him ) ?
And ( the departing soul ) comes to realize that ( now ) is the hour of parting ( with all ) .
And one leg clings to the other .
Towards your Lord is the departure that day .
So ( how ill - fated is he that ) he neither affirmed ( what the Messenger said ) nor offered Prayer .
Rather he kept belying and turning away .
Then went off towards his family in arrogance .
Woe to you ( when dying ) , then woe to you ( in the grave ) .
Then again woe to you ( on the Last Day ) , then woe to you ( in Hell ) .
Does man think that he will be left for nothing ( without any reckoning ) ?
Was he not ( in his beginning ) a sperm drop ejaculated ( into the womans womb ) ?
Then it developed into a hanging mass ( clinging to the womb like a nest ) . Then He created ( in it the preliminary form of all the limbs of the body ) . Then He set ( them ) right .
Then He made from the same sperm drop two genders : male and female .
Then has He not the power to give life to the dead again ?
Surely there has passed over man a period of time when he was not a thing worth mentioning .
Surely We created man from a fertilized ovum that We keep turning and examining ( from one stage to the next till birth ) . So We have made him ( in the order of ) hearing ( then ) seeing .
Indeed We also showed him the way ( to understanding and insight for distinguishing between the Truth and falsehood ) whether he ( now ) becomes thankful or continues to be ungrateful .
Verily We have prepared for the disbelievers chains ( for the feet ) , neck - fetter and the Blazing Fire ( of Hell ) .
Surely the sincerely devoted and obedient will drink from the cups ( of the holy drink ) mixed with kafur ( to enhance its aroma , colour and taste ) .
( Kafur ) is a spring ( in Paradise ) from which will drink ( the privileged ) servants of Allah ( i . e . Awliya Allah ) and will ( also ) make it flow to wherever they will desire in the form of small brooks ( to make others drink of it ) .
( These privileged servants of Allah are those ) who fulfil their vows and keep fearing that Day whose severity spreads afar .
And they give ( their own ) food , in deep love of Allah , to the needy , the orphan and prisoner ( out of sacrifice , despite their own desire and need for it ) .
( And say : ) We are feeding you only to please Allah . We do not seek any recompense from you nor ( wish for ) any thanks .
We fear from our Lord the Day which will make ( the faces ) look very dark ( and ) ugly .
So Allah will save them from the terror of that Day ( for their fear of Allah ) and will grant them freshness , bloom and blush ( on their faces ) and ecstasy and delight ( in their hearts ) .
And will bless them with Gardens ( to live in ) and silky clothes ( to wear ) , a reward for their patience .
Reclining in it against cushions on raised couches , they will find there neither intense cold nor heat .
And the shades ( of trees in Paradise ) will close upon them and the bunches of their ( fruits ) will be hanging low .
And ( the servants ) will go round them with vessels of silver and ( pure and clean ) goblets of shining glass .
And glasses made of silver which they will have filled with exact measures ( according to everyones desire ) .
And they will be made to drink there cups of ( the holy drink ) mixed with Zanjabil .
( Zanjabil ) is a spring in this ( Paradise ) named Salsabil .
And going round them will be ( innocent ) adolescents who will remain ever - young . When you will see them you will take them as scattered pearls .
And when you will look ( at Paradise ) you will find blessings ( in abundance ) and a mighty kingdom ( all around ) .
They will be clad in green fine silk and rich brocade attire , and they will be made to wear silver bracelets , and their Lord will make them drink a holy beverarge .
Surely that will be your reward and your hard work is acknowledged .
Indeed We have revealed the Quran to you piecemeal .
So ( continue to ) be patient for the sake of your Lords Command and do not give your ear to any liar , sinner or disbeliever or thankless person from among them .
And remember the Name of your Lord morning and evening .
And prostrate yourself before His Presence for some hours of the night and glorify Him during ( the rest of ) the long hours of the night .
Surely these ( world - mongers ) love the gains that are achievable right away . And they have put behind their backs ( the remembrance of ) the very hard Day .
( They do not realize that ) We alone have created them and have made their every joint strong , and We can replace them whenever We may please with the people like them .
Indeed this ( Quran ) is a Reminder . So whoever desires may adopt the way to ( reach ) his Lord .
And you cannot wish anything yourselves except what Allah wills . Indeed Allah is All - Knowing , Most Wise .
He admits whom He wills to ( the circle of ) His Mercy and He has prepared a grievous torment for the wrongdoers .
By the soft blowing pleasant breezes which blow in succession .
Then by the violent winds which blow with fierce gusts .
And by those which spread the clouds all around .
Then by those which split ( them ) apart and break them off .
Then by those which bring direction and guidance .
To accomplish the argument or to warn .
Surely the promise ( of the Last Day ) which is being given to you will be certainly fulfilled .
Then when the light of the stars will be extinguished .
And when the heavenly universe will be split open .
And when the mountains will be ( broken down to dust ) and blown off .
And when the Messengers will be brought together at the appointed time ( to bear witness to their respective communities ) .
Well , for what Day is the term ( of all the affairs ) appointed ?
For the Day of Judgment !
And who has told you what the Day of Judgment is ?
Woe ( and devastation ) to the deniers on that Day !
Did We not destroy the people ( who denied ) before ?
Then We cause the later ones also to follow them ( in destruction ) .
This is how We sort out ( the matter ) with the evildoers .
Woe to the deniers on that Day !
Did We not create you from ( a drop ) of detestable fluid ?
Then We placed it in a secure place ( i . e . the mothers womb ) .
Till an appointed period ( of time ) .
Then We determined time periods ( for all the stages of growth from conception to birth ) . And how excellent do We determine !
Woe to the deniers on that Day !
Have We not made the earth an assembling expanse .
( That draws together ) the living ( as well as ) the dead ?
We placed on it soaring high and firm mountains and gave you sweet water to drink ( from springs of sweet fresh water ) .
Woe to the deniers on that Day !
( Now ) move on to that ( torment ) which you used to deny .
Proceed towards that shadow ( of the smoke of Hell ) that forks into three columns .
A shadow which is neither cool nor protecting against the heat of fire .
Indeed that ( Hell ) throws up sparks and flames ( huge ) as a lofty palace .
( It also appears ) as if those ( sparks ) are yellow camels .
Woe to the deniers on that Day !
This is a Day ( on which ) they will not be able to speak too .
Nor will they be allowed to offer any excuses .
Woe to the deniers on that Day !
This is the Day of Judgment ( on which ) We will gather you and ( all ) the earlier communities .
Then if you have any scheme ( and trick to escape from the torment ) , try ( that ) against Me .
Woe ( dejection ) to the deniers on that Day !
Surely the Godfearing will be ( rejoicing ) under cool shades and amid springs .
And whatever fruits they will long for ( will be available for them ) .
( It will be said to them : ) Enjoy eating and drinking to your taste as a reward for what you used to do .
Indeed the same way do we We reward the pious .
Woe to the deniers on that Day !
( O deniers of Truth ! ) Eat and enjoy yourselves for a short while . No doubt , you are the evildoers .
Woe to the deniers on that Day !
And when it is said to them : Bow down ( before Allah ) , they do not bow .
Woe to the deniers on that Day !
Then in what Revelations after this ( Quran ) will they believe ?
What is ( it ) they are questioning about one another ?
( Are they asking ) of the Great News .
About which they differ ?
( That News is ) not at all ( deniable ) . They will soon know ( that reality ) .
( We ) once more ( assert : Dissent and denial are ) in no way ( right ) . They will come to know soon .
Have We not made the earth a place to stay for ( life ) and to earn living and deeds ?
And ( have We not ) erected mountains raised ( out of it ) ?
And ( ponder : ) We ( have ) created you in pairs ( for reproduction ) .
And We ( have ) made your sleep ( a means of bodily ) rest .
And We ( have ) made the night a covering ( by virtue of its darkness ) .
And We ( have ) made the day ( a time ) for ( earning ) livelihood .
And ( now study the spatial universe as well ) . We built above you seven strong ( firmaments ) .
And We made ( the sun a massive ) fountainhead of light and heat .
And We poured water in torrents from rain - laden clouds .
So that by means of this ( downpour ) We bring forth ( from the earth ) grain and vegetation .
And ( grow ) thick gardens .
( Observing these signs of Our Might , know that ) the Day of Judgment ( Resurrection too ) is certainly a fixed time .
The Day when the Trumpet will be blown , you will flock ( in the Holy Presence of Allah ) in droves .
And the ( layers of ) heaven shall be torn and ( owing to the rip ) they will become ( as if ) all doors .
And the mountains ( after being reduced to dust ) will be blown off ( into the atmosphere ) ; so they will be ( eliminated like ) a mirage .
Surely , Hell is a place of ambush .
( That ) is the abode of rebels .
They will abide there for recurrent , infinite periods .
They will taste in it neither coolness ( of any sort ) nor any drink .
Except boiling water and suppurated fluid oozing ( from the wounds of the inmates of Hell ) .
A compensation commensurate with ( their revolt ) .
For they had no fear of Reckoning ( on the Last Day ) in the least .
And they used to utterly deny Our Signs .
And We have preserved everything ( major or minor ) in writing .
( O disbelievers , you excelled in rebellion and disbelief in the world . ) Now taste the outcome ( of your actions ) . We shall keep increasing but the torment upon you .
Surely the Godfearing will triumph .
( For them ) there will be gardens and grapes .
And well - matched young maidens .
And overflowing cups ( of holy beverage ) .
There , these ( people ) will neither hear any foolish talk nor belie ( one another ) .
From your Lord this is the reward which is an ( amply ) sufficient bestowal ( in proportion to your works ) .
He is the Lord of ( all ) the heavens and the earth and whatever is between them , the Most Kind . ( But on the Last Day the Effect and Impact of His Mighty Power and Most High Authority will be such that ) none ( from His Creation ) will dare converse with Him .
That Day Gabriel ( the Spirit of Peace and Security ) and ( all ) angels will stand in ranks , none able to speak except he whom the Most Kind Lord would already have awarded sanction ( to intercede ) and who also said the right thing , ( in keeping with the teachings of Islam , during his life of the world ) .
This is the Day of Truth . So , whoever longs may obtain an abode ( of mercy and nearness ) in the Presence of his Lord .
We have , indeed , warned you of the impending torment . On that Day , everyone will see whatever ( acts ) he has sent ahead and ( every ) disbeliever will say : Would that I were dust ( and escaped this punishment ) !
By the ( angels ) who violently snatch out ( the souls of the disbelievers from each tendon and ligament of their body ) .
And by the ( angels ) who unweave sinews ( of the believers organisms ) gently and peacefully .
And by the ( angels ) who swiftly glide ( between the heavens and the earth ) .
Then by the ( angels ) who with burst of speed sprint past others .
Then by the ( angels ) who manage different affairs well .
( When they will be commanded to devastate the system of the universe ) that day everything in motion ( in the universe ) will tremor into violent convulsion .
Chased by a succeeding convulsion .
That day hearts ( of the people ) will pound with agony and terror .
Their eyes will be downcast ( with dread and horror ) .
The disbelievers say : Shall we be reverted to the former life ?
( Shall we be given life even ) when we shall have become rotten ( hollow ) bones ?
They say : This ( return ) would then be a losing return .
Then it will be rending ( of all heavenly bodies ) asunder with single extremely horrible explosion .
Then they ( all ) will forgather suddenly in the open expanse ( for assembly ) .
Has the account of Musa ( Moses ) reached you ?
When His Lord called out to him in the sacred valley of Tuwa .
( And commanded : ) Go to Pharaoh . He has become a rebel .
Then say ( to him ) : Do you wish that you should be purified ?
( And do you desire that ) I guide you to your Lord so that you may fear ( Him ) ?
Then Musa ( Moses ) showed him the Great Sign .
But he denied it and disobeyed .
Then , turning away ( from the Truth ) , he launched struggle ( in rivalry against Musa [ Moses ] ) .
So he gathered ( people ) and started calling out .
And said : I am your lord , most high .
Then Allah seized him in ( dual ) punishment of this world and the Hereafter .
Surely in this ( incident ) there is a great lesson of warning for him who fears ( Allah ) .
Is it you who are harder to create or ( the entire ) galactic universe that He has built ?
He raised high all the heavenly spheres ( planets , after creating them in the infinite cosmos ) , then moderated , equipoised and stabilized ( their composition , construction , functions and movements ) .
And He is the One Who blackened the night of heavenly space ( i . e . darkened the entire spatial environment like a murky night ) and emitted ( after creating ) the light of these ( planets from this space ) .
And He is the One Who , later , ( after the creation of the planet sun ) separated ( from it ) the earth , flung it with centrifugal force ( and spread its expanse to make it inhabitable ) .
He is the One Who drew water from the earth ( separately ) , and brought forth its vegetable kingdom ( from the rest of the dry regions ) .
And He is the One Who ( putting together different elements ) raised from the earth firmly fixed mountains .
( He did all this ) for the benefit of you and your livestock .
Then while ( the universe ) attains ( to its acme through evolution ) , there will befall the great all - encompassing calamity ( the Hour of Resurrection ) .
That Day man will retrospect his ( every ) effort and action .
And Hell will be made manifest to everyone who can see .
Then he who transgressed the limits .
And preferred the life of the world ( to the Hereafter ) .
Hell would truly be ( his ) abode .
But as for him who feared standing in the Presence of his Lord and forbade ( his ill - commanding ) self its appetites and lusts .
Paradise will surely be ( his ) abode .
( The disbelievers ) ask you about the Hour of Rising : When will it come to pass ?
What should be your concern in talking about ( its appointed time ) ?
Its ultimate limit is up to your Lord ( i . e . as in the beginning , only Oneness will survive in the end as well ) .
You are but a Warner to him who fears it .
So the Day when they will see it , they ( will feel as if they ) did not tarry ( in the world ) but for one evening or one morning .
A feeling of uneasiness came upon his ( holy ) face and he turned aside his ( radiant ) face .
Because a blind man approached him ( who interrupted his discourse ) .
And what do you know ? Perhaps he would be purified ( further owing to your attending to him ) .
Or would accept ( your ) advice which would provide him benefit ( more and more ) .
But the one who disregards ( Din [ Religion ) ] .
You administer greater care ( for his acceptance of Islam ) .
Whereas there is no ( burden of ) responsibility on you even if he does not adopt purification ( faith ) .
And as for him who has ( himself ) come to you exerting ( in pursuit of piousness ) .
And he fears ( his Lord ) as well .
But you are not focusing your attention on him .
( O My Esteemed Beloved ! ) Not so indeed ! These ( Verses of the Holy Quran ) are but advice .
The one who seeks may accept it ( and learn by heart ) .
( They are inscribed ) on venerable and revered pages .
Which are exalted ( and ) purified .
( Have come forth ) by the hands of emissaries ( and scribes ) .
Who are possessors of eminence ( and ) embodiments of obedience .
Ruin seize ( the cursed disbelieving ) man ! How ungrateful he is ! ( He does not honour the award of such a great blessing after receiving it . )
From what stuff has Allah created him ?
He created him from a sperm drop , then determined his measure along with that ( regarding genes and sex ) .
Then ( after structuring , developing and completing it ) eased for him the passage ( of delivery from the mothers womb ) .
Then caused him to die and ( buried him ) into a grave .
Then whenever He wills , He will raise them up ( alive again ) .
Indeed he ( the disobedient man ) did not fulfil that ( obligatory due ) which ( Allah ) had commanded him .
So man should look at his food ( and ponder ) .
Indeed We pour down water in torrents .
Then We split the earth and tear it asunder .
We then grow from it grain .
And grapes and vegetables .
And the olive and the date palm .
And thickly planted dense gardens .
And ( a variety of ) fruits and ( animals ) fodder .
As provision both for you and your livestock ( to live on ) .
So , when the Deafening Blast comes .
On that Day man will flee from his brother .
And from his mother and his father ( too ) .
And ( even ) from his wife and his children .
On that Day every person will be in such a ( dismal ) state that will make him unconcerned ( with everyone else ) .
The same Day many faces will ( be such as will ) be shining ( with light ) .
( They will be ) smiling , laughing ( and ) rejoicing .
And numerous faces there will be covered with dust that Day .
These ( faces ) will be overshadowed with darkness ( as well ) .
They are the people who are disbelievers ( and ) mischief - mongers ( evildoers ) .
When the sun will be folded up and extinguished .
And the stars will fall ( from their galaxies ) .
And when the mountains , ( after having changed into dust , ) will be set in motion ( into atmosphere ) .
And when the she - camels heavy with young will be left neglected and discarded ( i . e . no one will tend them ) .
And when ( fear - stricken ) wild beasts will be herded together .
When ( all ) oceans and rivers will be made to rise and swell .
And when souls will be united ( with their bodies ) .
And when the infant girl buried alive will be asked .
For what crime was she slain ?
And when the records of deeds will be laid open .
And when the layers of heaven will be torn asunder and moved away from their places .
And when ( the Fire of ) Hell will be burnt ablaze .
And when Paradise will be brought up close .
Everyone will come to know what he has brought forth .
So I swear by ( the heavenly spheres ) which recede ( after appearing ) .
Which revolve freely , ( then ) hide ( after appearing ) .
And by the night when its darkness tapers off .
And by the morning when its light dawns .
Indeed , this ( Quran ) is the Word ( communicated ) by a glorious and most venerable Messenger .
Who is Mighty and Strong ( in Calling to the Truth , Preaching the faith in Messengership and Spiritual Competence , and ) is held in extreme reverence and veneration ( and splendour and glory ) in the Presence of the Lord of the Throne .
Entitled to obligatory obedience ( by all the worlds because obedience to him is obedience to Allah ) and faithful to His trust ( possesses Revelation and all divine secrets of the heavens and the earth ) .
And , ( O people , ) he who blesses you with his ( holy ) companionship ( Muhammad [ Allah bless him and give him peace ] ) is not mad . ( Whatever he communicates is the Truth . )
And he has indeed seen ( the Absolute Beauty of the Lord of the Throne ) on the effulgent horizon ( of the Realm of Divinity ) .
And he ( the glorious Messenger ) is not at all miserly in ( disclosing ) the Unseen . ( The Lord of the Throne has not left for him any deficiency . )
Nor is that ( Quran ) the utterance of any accursed Satan .
Then , ( O you doomed , ) where are you going ( disregarding such a valuable treasure ) ?
This ( Quran ) is but admonition ( revealed ) for all the worlds .
Everyone of you who aspires to tread the straight path ( can take guidance from this source spring ) .
And you can aspire only to what Allah intends , Who is the Sustainer of all the worlds .
When ( all ) the heavenly spheres will be split apart .
And when the planets will fall and scatter .
And when oceans ( and rivers ) will flood and overflow .
And when graves will be overturned .
Then everyone will come to know what actions he sent forward and what he left behind .
O man ! What has deluded you concerning your Gracious Lord .
( The One ) Who created you ( from a fertiled ovum in the mothers womb ) , then ( to structure your limbs at the fetal stage ) He shaped you aright , then brought about proportionate alteration in your constitution ?
He constituted you in whatever form He willed .
That is the Truth ( but ) on the contrary you deny the Day of Recompense .
Whereas there are guardian angels appointed over you .
( Who are ) dignified , the scribes ( writing the records of all your deeds ) .
They know ( all ) those ( actions ) which you do .
Indeed , the truly good will be in the Garden of Bliss .
And surely the evildoers will be in the ( Blazing Fire of ) Hell .
They will enter it on the Day of Rising .
And will never be able to absent themselves from it ( Hell ) .
And what have you made out what the Day of Recompense is ?
So what have you learnt about what the Day of Recompense is ?
It is the Day when no soul will own anything for any other soul and the Command on that Day will be entirely Allahs .
Woe to those who give less in measure or weight !
When ( they ) take by measure from others they take ( from them ) full .
And when they ( themselves ) give by measure or weigh to others they give them less .
Do they not believe that they will be raised up ( again after death ) .
For a Terrible Day .
The Day when all mankind will stand before the Lord of all the worlds ?
This is the Truth that the record of the evildoers is kept in Sijjin ( the ante - chamber of Hell ) .
And what do you know what Sijjin is ?
It is an inscribed book ( set down in the large ante - chamber of the prison of Hell , with the names and evil deeds of every inmate of Hell registered in it ) .
Woe to the deniers on that Day .
Those who deny the Day of Recompense !
And no one else denies it except every defiant and sinner .
When Our Revelations are read out to him , he says ( or thinks ) that ( they are ) tales of the ancients .
That is not at all ( the case ) ; rather ( the fact is that the evil deeds ) which they earned have rusted their hearts . ( The Revelations , therefore , do not move their hearts . )
The Truth is that they will be screened off ( to deprive them of ) the sight of their Lord .
Then they will be cast into Hell .
Then it will be said to them : This is ( the punishment of Hell ) which you used to belie .
This is ( also ) True that the record of the truly pious is for sure maintained in Illiyyin ( the ante - chamber of Paradise ) .
And what do you know what Illiyyin is ?
It is an inscribed book ( set down in the large ante - chamber of a lofty mansion of Paradise with the names and pious deeds of those who will be allocated superior stations in Paradise ) .
The angels closest ( to Allah ) remain present here .
Indeed the truly pious , ( joyful and glad , ) will be in blissful Paradise .
Reclining on couches , enjoying the wonderful sights .
You will find on their faces the glow and freshness of bliss and delight .
They shall be served with securely sealed delicious and holy beverage .
Its seal will be musk . And ( it is this beverage which ) all aspirants should hastily strive and compete to acquire . ( Some seek the drink of bliss while others long for the drink of nearness and still others yearn for the drink of countenance all will be served according to their respective tastes ) .
And this ( beverage of Paradise ) will be mixed with the water of Tasnim .
( This Tasnim ) is a fountain at which only the Closer Ones drink .
Surely ( in the worldly life ) the evildoers used to ridicule the believers .
And winked at one another when they passed by them .
And when they went back to their families they used to exult over the believers ( by comparing the believers destitution and their own affluence ) and returned speaking of them with jests .
And when they ( the arrogant people ) saw these ( the indigent believers ) , they used to say : They have gone astray , ( i . e . they have lost the world while the Hereafter is nothing but fiction . )
Yet they had not been sent to watch over their ( state of affairs ) .
So ( see ) Today the believers are laughing at the disbelievers .
Reclining on ornamented couches , they are viewing the sight ( comparing their own prosperity and the disbelievers impoverishment ) .
So , have the disbelievers been rewarded in full for ( the mockery ) which they used to inflict upon ( the believers ) ?
When ( all ) the heavenly bodies will split asunder .
And obey the Command of their Lord ( with regard to the catastrophic split - up ) and ( it is this implementation of the Command ) that they are bound to do .
And when the earth will be flattened out ( after it is broken into dust particles ) .
And it will cast out all that is inside it and become empty .
And ( it ) will ( also ) obey the Command of its Lord ( with regard to catastrophic split - up ) and ( it is this obedience ) which it is worthy of .
O man ! You sustain rigours to reach your Lord . Ultimately you shall meet Him .
So as for him who will be given his record in his right hand .
He will soon be given an easy reckoning .
And will return to his family rejoicing .
And as for him who shall be given his record behind his back .
He will soon cry out for death .
And he will enter the Blazing Fire of Hell .
Surely he lived joyfully with his family ( in the world ) .
No doubt he thought he would never return ( to his Lord ) for Reckoning .
Why not ! Indeed his Lord is ever watching him .
So I swear by the evening glow ( i . e . the twilight or its later glare ) .
And by the night and all that it envelops ( under its embrace ) .
And the moon when it appears full .
You will assuredly ride along stage by stage .
So , what is the matter with them that ( even after witnessing the Truth of the forecast of the Quran ) , they do not believe ?
And when the Quran is recited to them , they do not fall down prostrate ( before Allah ) ?
Instead , the disbelievers ( further ) deny it .
And Allah knows best ( the contention and disbelief ) which they are piling .
So give them the news of a painful punishment .
But they who believe and do pious deeds , for them is an unending ( everlasting ) reward .
By the heaven with its Houses of the Zodiac ( galaxies ) .
And by the Promised Day .
And by the One Who will be Present ( that Day ) and by what will be brought to the Presence .
The ( people ) of the trenches were slain .
( The people of ) the fierce fire which was ( fed ) with abundant fuel .
When they sat beside it .
And they are themselves witnesses to all what they did to the believers ( i . e . casting them into the fire and burning them ) .
And nothing ( of the believers ) was annoying them except that they had believed in Allah Almighty , All - Praiseworthy .
To Whom the ( entire ) Kingdom of the heavens and the earth belongs and Allah is Witness over everything .
Indeed those who persecute the believing men and women and then do not ( even ) repent , for them is the punishment of Hell , and for them is ( especially ) the torment of burning in the Fire .
And indeed those who believe and keep doing pious deeds , for them are Gardens with streams flowing under them . This is the Great Victory .
Surely the seizure of your Lord is most severe .
Verily He creates the first time and He is the One Who will bring to life the second time .
He is the Most Forgiving , the Most Loving .
The Lord of the Throne ( controlling the whole universe ) and the Lord of Honour .
He ( thoroughly ) executes whatever He intends .
Has the news of the troops reached you ?
The troops of Pharaoh and Thamud ?
But such disbelievers ( persistently strive to ) belie ( the Truth ) .
And Allah encompasses ( them ) from all sides .
It is indeed the Glorious Quran .
( Inscribed ) in the very well - guarded tablet al - Lawh - al - Mahfuz .
By the ( endless expanse and infinite space of ) heaven and the Nightly ( discernable ) Visitant .
And what do you know what the Nightly ( discernable ) Visitant is ?
( It implies ) every heavenly body ( may it be a star , a planet or any one of the heavenly spheres ) which shines and brightens ( the space ) .
There is no human soul but with a protector ( appointed ) over it .
So man should ponder ( and find out ) from what substance he has been created .
He has been created from the ejaculated fluid ( i . e . virile and motile sperm ) .
That proceeds from the middle of the sacrum ( and pelvic girdle ) and gets ejected .
Indeed He has the Power to bring it ( life ) back .
The Day when all secrets will be disclosed .
Then man will have neither any strength ( himself ) nor any helper .
By the heavenly universe which will regress to its primitive state .
And by the earth which will split asunder ( and change into dust particles ) .
This is indeed a decisive ( absolute ) Commandment .
And it is no joke !
Indeed they ( the disbelievers ) are hatching plots .
And I am designing My own Strategy .
So give the disbelievers a respite ( for a while and not much but ) let them relax a little ( more ) .
Glorify the Name of your Lord , the Most High .
He Who has created ( everything in the Universe ) and then ( fulfilling all requisites ) equipoised it to its exact proportion .
And He Who has determined law , ( phenomena for every creation ) and guided it to its way ( of sustaining and functioning according to its respective system ) .
And He Who has brought forth green pasture ( from the earth ) .
And then made it blackened stubble .
( O Esteemed Beloved ! ) We shall teach you ( in a way ) that nothing shall you ( ever ) forget .
Except what Allah wills . Indeed He knows all , manifest as well as hidden ( i . e . open to human perception as well as veiled from it and the audible and inaudible both ) .
We shall ( also ) facilitate you ( to put into practice this ) easy ( Law ) .
So keep admonishing , provided admonition benefits ( the listeners ) .
But only he who fears ( Allah ) will accept the admonition .
And the wretched one will avoid and evade it .
He who will enter the greatest Fire ( on the Day of Judgment ) .
Then he will neither die nor live in it .
Indeed only he who is purified ( from the afflictions of his ill - commanding self and pollution of sins ) will triumph .
The one who remembers the Name of his Lord and offers Prayers ( regularly and abundantly ) .
Yet you go for the ( pleasures of ) the worldly life ( instead of turning towards Allah ) .
Whereas ( the relish for and comfort of ) the Hereafter is preferable and everlasting .
Indeed this ( enlightenment ) is ( also contained ) in earlier scriptures .
The scriptures of Ibrahim ( Abraham ) and Musa ( Moses ) .
Has the news reached you of the Calamity Overwhelming ( everything ) ?
Many faces on that Day will be humiliated and degraded .
( Forgetting Allah ) , toiling ( for worldly gains ) , sustaining ( strenuous ) rigours ( for a fleeting luxury ) .
Will plunge into the Blazing Fire .
( They will be ) offered to drink ( water ) from a boiling spring .
They shall have no food except thorny and dry , venomous herbage .
( This food ) will neither nourish nor gratify hunger .
( On the contrary ) that Day a number of faces will be ( pleasing to the eye , ) glowing with joy and freshness .
Delighted and rejoicing over their ( righteous ) ventures .
( Abiding ) in magnificent Paradise .
Where they will not hear anything absurd ( as the infidels used to say to them in the world ) .
In it there will be flowing springs .
And raised - up couches ( laid ) .
And goblets ( decently ) set in place .
And silken cushions orderly lined up .
And soft and refined carpets and rugs ( richly ) spread .
( The disbelievers wonder how all that would be arranged in Paradise . So ) do they not see how has the camel been created ( in an unusual form ) ?
And ( do they not observe ) how is the heaven raised so high ( with its infinite expanse ) ?
And ( do they not see ) how have the mountains been created ( raised out of the earth ) ?
( Nor do they consider ) how has the earth been spread out ( besides its round shape ) ?
So , continuously admonish them , for you are but an admonisher .
And not imposed upon them ( as ) a despot and oppressor .
But anyone who turns away and becomes a disbeliever .
Allah will torment him with the greatest punishment .
Indeed , it is to Us that they will return ( in the end ) .
Then surely it is Our concern to call them to account .
By the emerging dawn ( that dispels the darkness of night ) .
And by the ten ( blessed ) nights .
And by the even and the odd .
And by the night as it departs . ( Every night or particularly the Muzdalifa night or Qadr night . )
Surely in that is a mighty oath for the wise .
Have you not seen how your Lord treated ( the people of Ad ) ?
( They ) were ( the people ) of Iram ( and ) were ( tall like ) lofty columns , ( possessing towering castles ) .
The like of which has not ( at all ) been created in the countries ( of the world ) .
And ( what treatment was given to ) Thamud , who carved rocks ( and constructed hundreds of cities ) in the ( Qura ) valley ?
And ( how was ) Pharaoh ( dealt with ) who wielded big armies ( and used to punish victims with stakes ) ?
( They were ) the people who perpetrated tyranny in their ( respective ) countries .
And spread there great mischief and corruption .
Then your Lord unleashed the scourge of punishment on them .
Indeed , your Lord is Ever - Watchful ( over the tyrant rebels ) .
But ( so is ) man that when his Lord tests him ( by providing him pleasure and comfort ) and honours him and gives him bounties , he says : My Lord has honoured me .
But when He tries him ( by afflicting pain and discomfort ) and limits his means of sustenance , he says : My Lord has humiliated me .
No indeed ! But ( the truth is that after you gain honour and good fortune ) you do not give honour and care to orphans .
Nor do you inspire one another ( in society ) to promote feeding the destitute ( the poor and the needy ) .
You lay hand on the inherited wealth and devour it ( yourselves and do not pay the poverty - stricken their due ) .
And you love wealth and riches inordinately .
Assuredly , when the earth will be cleft asunder and crushed to dust particles .
And your Lord will unveil His Light and the angels will appear ( before His Presence ) rank upon rank .
And that Day Hell will be brought forth . On that Day man will come to understand , but how will admonition ( avail him then ) ?
He will say : Would that I had sent ( something ) ahead of me for my ( real ) life ( which would have helped me today ) !
But that Day no one will be able to torment like His torment .
And no one will be able to bind as He binds .
O contented ( pleased ) self !
Return to your Lord in such a state that you are both the aspirant to and the aspired of His pleasure ( i . e . you seek His pleasure and He seeks yours ) .
So join My ( perfect ) servants .
And enter Paradise ( of my nearness and sight ) .
I swear by this city ( Makka ) .
( O My Esteemed Beloved , ) because you are residing in it .
( O My Esteemed Beloved ! ) By ( your ) father ( Adam or Ibrahim [ Abraham ] ) and by those who are born .
Indeed We have created man ( ever suffering ) in rigours .
Does he think that no one can ever overpower him ?
( Boasting , ) he says : I have spent heaps of wealth .
Does he think that no one has seen him ( making this extravagant spending ) ?
Have We not made for him two eyes ?
And ( have We not given him ) a tongue and two lips ?
And ( have We also not ) shown him the two highways ( of good and evil ) ?
But he has not yet attempted the steep ascent ( of Din [ Religion ] ) of Truth and practical life dedicated to good and piety ) .
And what have you thought of the steep ascent ( of the rigours of the Din [ Religion ] of Truth ) ?
It is freeing a neck ( from slavery and subjugation ) .
Or feeding on a day of scarcity ( the poor and the needy during famine and scarcity i . e . striving to put an end to their sufferings and economic deadlock ) .
The orphaned relative .
Or the poverty - stricken destitute who is just rundown ( and homeless ) .
( Provided this striving soul is ) one of those who believe and advise one another patience and tolerance and urge one another for mutual affection and mercy .
These are the people of the Right Hand ( the privileged and the pardoned ) .
And those who reject Our Signs are the people of the Left Hand ( the callous and the doomed ) .
Fire will be enclosed upon them ( covering from all sides ) .
By the sun and by its brightness .
And by the moon when it follows the sun ( reflects sunshine ) .
And by the day when it displays the sun ( brings it forth shining ) .
And by the night when it draws a veil over the sun ( from one of the hemispheres of the earth ) .
And by the heaven and by that ( energy ) which built it ( with Allahs permission in the form of a vast universe ) .
And by the earth and by that ( force which , by Allahs Command , ) pulled it ( from the sun far ) apart .
And by the human soul and by the One Who provided it with an all - dimensional poise , proportion and perfection .
Then He inspired it with ( discrimination between ) vice and virtue .
Indeed the one who purifies his ( ill - commanding ) self ( from all vain and vicious desires and cultivates in it virtue and piousness ) succeeds .
But the one who corrupts himself ( in sins and suppresses virtue ) is doomed indeed .
The people of Thamud rejected ( their Messenger Salih ) due to their rebellion .
When the most wretched of them stood up .
Allahs Messenger said to them : Guard ( that ) she - camel and ( the time of ) her taking water .
But they rejected the Messenger and hamstrung ( the she - camel ) . So because of their sin their Lord sent down destruction on them and levelled ( them all in the torment devastating ) the town .
And Allah does not fear any repercussions of this ( devastation ) .
By the night when it covers up ( and conceals everything in its darkness ) .
And by the day when it brightens up .
And by that Being Who created male and female ( in everything ) .
Indeed your striving is different ( and singular ) .
So he who gives away ( his wealth in the way of Allah ) and commits himself to piousness .
And affirms good ( Din [ Religion ] ) of Truth and life after death through charity and Godwariness ) .
Soon We shall facilitate him in seeking ( Allahs pleasure ) with ease .
But he who is miser and disregards ( spending in the cause of Allah ) .
And ( in this way ) belies good ( Din [ Religion ] ) of Truth and life after death ) .
Soon shall We facilitate him landing into hardship ( advancing towards torment , so that punishment becomes his rightful due ) .
And his wealth will not help him any way when he falls into ( the pit of ) destruction .
Indeed it is binding on Us to show you the path ( of Truth ) .
And indeed We are the Master of the Hereafter and the world .
So I have warned you of the raging Fire ( of Hell ) .
No one but only the most wretched shall enter it .
Who denies ( Din [ Religion ] of Truth ) and turns away ( from obedience to the Messenger [ blessings and peace be upon him ] ) .
But the most pious shall be saved from this ( Fire ) .
Who gives his wealth away ( in the cause of Allah ) to attain to purity ( of his soul and assets ) .
And who owes no favour to anyone that he is seeking to pay back .
Rather ( he spends ) seeking the pleasure of his Lord , Most High .
And soon shall he be well - pleased ( with Allah for His bestowal and Allah with him for his fidelity ) .
By the growing morning bright ( when the sun gains height and spreads its radiance ) .
And by the night when it covers up .
( Ever since He has chosen you , ) your Lord has not forsaken you . Nor is He displeased ( ever since He has taken you as His Beloved ) .
Indeed every following hour is a better ( source of eminence and exaltation ) for you than the preceding one .
And soon your Lord shall bestow upon you ( so much ) that you will be well - pleased .
( O Beloved ! ) Did He not find you an orphan , and then provided you ( a dignifying and graceful ) abode ?
And He found you engrossed and lost in His love and then made you achieve the coveted objective .
And He found you seeking ( union with your Lord ) and ( then blessed you with the pleasure of His sight and ) freed you of every need ( forever ) .
So , never should you be strict with any orphan .
Nor reproach any beggar ( seeking help at your door ) .
And proclaim ( well ) the bounties of your Lord .
Have We not broadened your breast for you ( for the light of knowledge , wisdom and spiritual gnosis ) ?
And We have taken off the load ( of grief of the Umma [ Community ] ) from you .
( The load ) which was growing heavier on your ( holy ) back .
And We exalted for you your remembrance ( by annexing it to Ours everywhere in the world and in the Hereafter ) .
So surely ease ( comes ) with every hardship .
Verily , with ( this ) hardship ( too ) there is ease .
So when you are free ( from educating the Umma ( Community ) , preaching Din ( Religion ) and fighting , and fulfilling your responsibilities ) then strive hard ( in remembrance and worship of your Lord ) .
And turn to your Lord earnestly .
By the fig and by the olive !
And by ( Mount ) Tur of Sinai !
And by this city of peace ( Makka ) !
Indeed We have created man in the best constitution ( equipoised in the finest proportion ) .
Then We returned him to the lowest state of the low .
Except for those who believe and do good works . For them is an unending ( everlasting ) reward .
Then who denies you after this regarding Din ( Religion or the Last Hour and reward and punishment ) ?
Is not Allah the Greatest of all the sovereigns ?
( O Beloved ! ) Read ( commencing ) with the Name of Allah , Who has created ( everything ) .
He created man from a hanging mass ( clinging ) like a leech ( in the mothers womb ) .
Read and your Lord is Most Generous .
Who taught man ( reading and writing ) by the pen .
Who ( besides that ) taught man ( all that ) which he did not know .
( But ) the fact is that ( the disobedient ) man rebels .
For the reason that ( apparently ) he finds himself self - sufficient ( in the world ) .
Surely ( every man ) has to return to your Lord .
Have you seen him who prevents .
The servant ( of Allah ) when he prays ?
Well , imagine ! If he had been rightly guided .
Or if he had commanded ( the people ) to be pious ( how beneficial it would have been ) !
But see now , when he has rejected ( the true Din [ Religion ] ) and has turned away ( from you , what torment is he going to face ? )
Does he not know that Allah monitors ( minutely all his conduct ) ?
Beware ! If he does not desist ( from the denigration of the Holy Prophet and antagonism against the true Din [ Religion ] ) , We shall certainly grab his forehead and drag him by the forelock .
His lying ( and ) sinful forehead !
Then let him call his companions ( for help ) .
We too shall soon call ( Our ) guards ( the angels appointed to inflict the punishment of Hell ) .
No indeed ! Do not pay any heed to his doings and , ( O Esteemed Beloved , ) persist in prostration and keep drawing near ( Us more and more ) .
Surely We sent down this ( Holy Quran ) during the Night of Destiny .
And what have you made out what the Night of Destiny is ?
The Night of Destiny is better than a thousand months ( in merit of excellence , blessings , reward and recompense ) .
The angels and the Spirit of Peace ( Gabriel ) descend by their Lords Command during this ( night ) with decrees concerning all matters ( of blessings and bounties ) .
This ( night ) is ( absolute ) peace and security till daybreak .
The disbelievers from among the People of the Book and the idolaters would not desist ( from disbelief ) until clear proof came to them .
That ( proof ) is the ( last ) Messenger from Allah , who recites ( to them ) holy pages ( of the Glorious Quran ) .
In which are ( written ) correct and firm Commandments .
These People of the Book did not dissent among themselves ( with regard to believing in the Prophethood and Messengership of the last Messenger [ Allah bless him and give him peace ] and recognizing his holy status ) , until after the clear proof had come to them ( of the Prophethood of Muhammad [ Allah bless him and give him peace ] .
Then , they broke up : some of them accepted belief in him while others became deniers and disbelievers out of jealousy , )
Whereas they were commanded to worship only Allah , making their Din ( faith and devotion ) sincerely His ( dissociating from every falsehood ) , to establish Prayer and to pay Zakat ( the Alms - due ) regularly . And this is the straight and firm Din ( Religion ) .
Indeed those who disbelieve from among the People of the Book and the polytheists ( all ) will be ( abiding ) in the Fire of Hell . They are its permanent dwellers . It is they who are the worst of the Creation .
Indeed those who believe and keep doing pious actions , it is they who are the best of the Creation .
Their reward is the Gardens of eternal living in the Presence of their Lord , with streams flowing under them . They shall live in them forever . Allah is pleased with them and they are pleased with Him . This ( status ) is meant for the one who fears his Lord .
When the earth will be violently shaken with a high - scale quake .
And when the earth will throw out ( all ) her burdens .
And man ( bewildered and baffled ) will say : What has happened to her ?
On that Day she will herself bring to light her experiences .
For your Lord will have made subservient to her ( the symbolic language of ) sharp signals .
On that Day people will form up in different groups , ( in diverse conditions , ) so that they may be shown their works .
Then he who will have done even an atoms weight of good will see it .
And he who will have done even an atoms weight of evil will ( also ) see it .
By the charging horses that gallop ( in the battlefield ) and pant .
And those that produce sparks striking their hoofs on rocks .
Then they blitz ( the enemy ) at dawn .
And then raise clouds of dust from the point ( of attack ) .
And then simultaneously pierce into ( the enemy ) ranks .
Indeed man is most ungrateful to his Lord .
And verily he is himself a witness to this ingratitude .
And indeed he is quite stubborn in his love of wealth .
But does he not know when those ( dead ) in the graves will be raised .
And secrets which are in hearts will be disclosed ?
Indeed their Lord will be Well Aware of their ( deeds ) on that Day ?
The high - scale jolt rocking ( the whole universe of the heavens and the earth ) and thunder !
And what is that high - scale jolt rocking ( everything ) and that thunder ?
And what have you made out what the high - scale jolt and thunder implies ?
( It implies ) the Day of Resurrection when ( the whole of ) mankind will become like scattered moths .
And the mountains will be like multicoloured carded wool .
So he whose scales of deeds in the balance will be heavy .
He will be in luxury and delight .
But as for him whose scales of deeds in the balance will be light .
His abode will be Hawiya ( a pit in Hell ) !
And what have you made out what that ( Hawiya ) is ?
It is ( an extremely deep pit of ) the fiercely Blazing Fire ( of Hell ) .
Your greed for massive wealth and the superiority complex has made you negligent ( of the Hereafter ) .
Until you go down to the graves .
No indeed ! You will soon learn ( this reality that wealth and riches will avail you nothing ) .
Again ( you are warned . ) No ! Never ! You will soon learn about ( your end ) .
Yes indeed ! Would that you knew with the knowledge of certitude ( the consequence of greed for wealth and riches and your negligence . Then , lost in the worldly pleasures , you would never forget the Hereafter like this ) .
( Consequent on your greed ) you shall surely see Hell .
Then you shall certainly see it with the eye of certitude .
Then on that Day you will certainly be questioned about the bounties ( given to you by Allah and the way you consumed them ) .
By the passing time ( whose rotation bears witness to the affairs of mankind ) .
Indeed man is at a loss ( for he is losing his valuable lifetime ) .
Except for those who believe and do good deeds and exhort one another to Truth and exhort one another to patience ( in the face of hardships and afflictions that are faced while preaching the Din [ Religion ] of Truth ) .
Woe to everyone who slanders ( face to face ) and finds fault ( in absence ) !
( Woe to him ) who accumulates wealth and keeps counting it !
He thinks that his riches will keep him alive forever .
By no means ! He shall certainly be cast into al - Hutama ( the crushing up Fire ) .
And what will make you understand what al - Hutama is ( the crushing up Fire ) ?
( It ) is a fire kindled by Allah .
That will rise over the hearts ( with its torture ) .
Indeed that ( Fire ) will be closed upon them all around .
In towering columns ( of fierce flames and they will not find any way to escape ) .
Have you not seen how your Lord dealt with those who had elephants ?
Did He not thwart their crafty designs ?
And He sent on to them ( ambient ) swarms of birds .
Which pelted them with stone - hard slugs .
Then ( Allah made them perish ) like chewed - up chaff .
To awake drive among the Quraish .
They were acclimatized to the summer and winter ( commercial ) trips .
So they should worship the Lord of this ( Sacred ) House ( Kaba , to give Him thanks ) .
Who has fed them in hunger ( i . e . provided them sustenance in starving conditions ) and secured them from fear ( of foes i . e . blessed them with secure and peaceful life ) .
Have you seen him who denies Din ( Religion ) ?
So he is the one who pushes away the orphan ( i . e . rejects the needs of the orphans and deprives them of their right ) .
And does not promote the cause of feeding the poor ( i . e . does not strive to end the economic exploitation of the poor and the needy ) .
So woe to those worshippers .
Who are unaware of ( the spirit of ) their Prayers ( i . e . they are mindful only of the rights of Allah but are heedless of the rights of fellow human beings ) .
Who show off ( their worship , for they only render a formal service to the Creator and are inconsiderate to the oppressed humanity ) .
And who refuse to lend even a worthless small object of use even on demand !
Indeed We have bestowed on you an infinite abundance , ( every kind of superiority , bliss and bounty ) .
So pray to your Lord and offer sacrifice ( a token of gratitude ) .
Indeed your enemy will remain childless and his race will be cut off .
Say : O disbelievers !
I do not worship those ( idols ) that you worship .
Nor do you worship ( the Lord ) Whom I worship .
I shall never ( ever ) worship those ( idols ) that you worship .
Nor shall you ( ever ) worship ( the Lord ) Whom I worship .
( So ) you have your Din ( Religion ) and I have my Din ( Religion ) .
When there comes Allahs help and victory .
And you see people joining Allahs Din ( Religion ) in droves .
Then hymn Allahs praise ( in gratitude ) , glorifying Him , and beg Him ( humbly ) for pardon . Surely He is Ever - Relenting and Oft - Returning ( with evermore compassion ) .
Perished be the two hands of Abu Lahab and be he perished himself , ( he has pointed his finger to Our Beloved ) !
Neither His ( inherited ) wealth nor his earned riches have given him any benefit .
Soon he will tumble into the Flaming Fire .
And his ( damned , wretched ) wife ( too ) who carries ( on her head ) the burden of ( thorny ) twigs ( and spreads them in the way of Our Beloved , to injure his holy soles ) .
Around her neck will be ( the same ) palm - fibre rope ( which she uses to bind the bunch of thorny twigs ) .
( O Esteemed Messenger ! ) Proclaim : He is Allah , Who is the One .
Allah is the Transcendent of all , the Protector and Far - Superior to all .
He has not begotten any nor is He begotten .
Nor is there anyone equal to Him .
Beseech : I seek refuge with the Lord Who brought ( the universe ) into existence with ( an ) explosion extremely fast .
From the evil influence ( and harmfulness ) of everything that He has created .
And ( in particular ) from the evil of murky night when ( its ) darkness prevails .
And from the evil of those women ( and men ) who practise magic on knots by blowing .
And from the mischief of every one jealous when he feels jealous .
Beseech : I seek refuge with the Lord of ( the whole of ) mankind .
Who is the King of ( all ) mankind .
Who is the God of the ( whole ) human race .
From the evil of slinking whisperer ( Satan ) who hides himself withdrawing ( from the influence of Allahs remembrance ) .
Who whispers into the hearts of mankind .
Whether he ( the whispering Satan ) comes from the jinn or mankind .
